
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Uncontaminated Animal Bedding 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Uncontaminated Animal Bedding Disposal Policy details the 
minimum requirements and procedures for the environmentally safe disposal of uncontaminated 
Animal Bedding.  
 
 
Laboratory Services (5433) provides biweekly services for the removal and disposal of 
infectious, medical, pathological and animal wastes.  
 
Medical wastes include: any waste materials generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or 
immunization of human beings or animals, cultures and stocks of infectious agents and 
associated biologicals, tissues, organs, specimens of body fluids, and, Human blood and blood 
products.  
 
The definition of medical waste specifically includes animal carcasses, animal body parts, and 
bedding of animals that were known to have been exposed to infectious agents during research or 
the production of biological materials.  
 
The services we provide are intended to cover the cost of disposal of Medical Waste. If you are 
producing animal bedding contaminated with pathogenic agents, infectious agents, or trace 
amounts of cytotoxic agents, please continue to dispose of these materials as medical waste. If 
the associated animals were intentionally infected with organisms likely to be pathogenic to 
healthy humans for the purposes of research, for invivo testing, or for the production of 
biological materials - then the bedding materials are medical waste.  
 
However, if the animals associated with the animal bedding were not intentionally infected with 
human pathogens, then these waste materials are considered regular trash. You should place the 
non-infected animal bedding in suitable trash bags and personally bring them to the nearest 
outdoor trash container or dumpster. You may wish to autoclave this material prior to disposal, 
but this is not a necessary step.  
 
Individual research protocols should detail if the bedding is expected to be contaminated or 
uncontaminated. If you are producing animal bedding that may be contaminated with hazardous 
chemicals or radioisotopes have been used in any assay, the waste generated must be handled as 
a chemical or radioactive waste. If there is a question as to the status of the bedding materials, 
please refer to the individual protocol.  


