
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Laboratory Services Approval of Contracts and Grants 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Laboratory Services Approval Policy on Contracts and Grants details 
the steps that must be followed to satisfy the training and laboratory safety procedures to receive 
approval for funded or non-funded research. 
 
 

Contracts and Grants 

Laboratory Services Approval 

Always begin any grant proposal by visiting with The Office of Research.  

This page only details the role Laboratory Services plays in the grant application process. 

The Laboratory Services Department monitors the biological, chemical, occupational, and 
radiological safety of the campus. The Department publishes manuals related to these safety 
issues; provides training and educational materials to faculty, staff, and students, as appropriate; 
reviews and approves research protocols related to these issues before research commences; and 
signs the UM Transmittal Sheet to indicate researchers' compliance with UM and federal 
regulations in proposals that are submitted to external sponsors for support.  

The University Safety Manuals, including the Biological, Chemical, Diving, Occupational, and 
Radiological Safety Manuals, list all University policies and procedures for the conduct of 
research in the laboratories of the University. Copies of the manuals are located on the Web, in 
departmental offices, in appropriate laboratories, and in the Laboratory Services Department.  

Safety Training Courses  

Current University policies state that before any work is begun, safety training is required of 
anyone using chemicals, biological agents, or radioactive isotopes and/or radiation sources. In 
addition to the safety training, safety examinations must be passed in the areas of chemical, 
biological, and radiological safety. For those persons working with pathogens, DNA, and human 
body parts and fluids, additional safety training is required. Researchers should contact the 
Laboratory Services Department regarding time and availability of training courses.  

Note: Subsequent University policy may require additional safety training and/or safety 
examinations. Before beginning any work, the Principal Investigator should contact the 
Laboratory Services Department for current policies and requirements.  

Review and Approval of Research Protocols  

The Laboratory Services Department review and approval is required on research protocols 
involving biological, chemical, occupational, or radiological safety, prior to the start of the 
research. Research protocols involving carcinogenic materials, biological or chemical hazards, 
radioactivity, or radiation must be submitted to Laboratory Services for approval. Laboratory 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

Services will review protocols and proposals, and will forward these materials to the Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) for their approval.  

Research Involving Human Blood or Tissue, Recombinant DNA, Pathogens  

Research involving pathogens, DNA, and/or human body parts and fluids requires approval of 
the Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), an institution-wide committee. If you are using 
human blood, other fluids, or tissue in your research, you must, in addition to the IRB 
application, contact the Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), IBC@olemiss.edu, for review 
and approval of the research protocol. The researcher must submit the IBC Memorandum of 
Understanding and Agreement, and a copy of the approved research protocol to Laboratory 
Services for approval. Final IRB approval is contingent upon IBC approval. 

Note: The Laboratory Services Department must sign the UM Transmittal Sheet if research 
proposed for external funding involves any of the above-mentioned environmental safety 
issues. Researchers should coordinate review with the Laboratory Services. Failure to process 
the protocol review and receive approval may delay the processing of the proposal or the start-
up of the project.   


