
 The University of Mississippi   

Page 1 of 2 
 

Academic Standing 
 
There are four different categories of academic standing based on a student’s academic 
performance: good standing, academic probation, academic suspension, or academic dismissal. 
Probation, suspension, and dismissal become effective at the end of the semester in which the 
student fails to attain the GPA specified in the rules following. Although the student will usually 
receive official notification of such action, notification is not a prerequisite to the student’s being 
placed on probation, suspended, or dismissed. It is the student’s responsibility to ascertain his 
or her academic status prior to the beginning of each semester. 
 
Academic Probation   - A student will be placed on academic probation, and will continue to be 
on probation, when his or her cumulative GPA falls below a minimum of 2.00. 
   
Academic Suspension - A student on academic probation will be placed on academic suspension 
if his or her cumulative GPA does not reach the required level according to the number of hours 
attempted (see below).  “Hours attempted” includes all previously earned credit hours (including 
hours transferred from other institutions, P and Z graded hours, and hours earned by examination 
or advanced placement) plus all attempted but unearned hours (including I, IP, and F graded 
courses).  For this calculation, the I mark will be computed as F. 
 
 Hours Attempted   Minimum GPA 
  1-30             1.60 
  31.60             1.80 
  61 or more                2.00 
 
A student who is on suspension will be denied readmission to the university for at least one regular 
semester (not including the summer term).  To continue enrollment without interruption, a student 
may be readmitted through one of the following options:   
 

 Attend The University of Mississippi during the summer term and earn a semester GPA of 
2.00 or higher on 12 or more hours.  Note:  It may be possible for a student who invokes 
the forgiveness policy during the summer term to raise his or her grade point average to be 
readmitted (Policy Directory: Policy Code ACA.AR.200.003). 
 

 Successfully petition the Academic Suspension & Dismissal Appeals Committee. 
 

 Enroll in the Contractual Readmission Program at least two weeks prior to the first day of 
classes in the fall or spring semester     
 

A student in the Contractual Readmission Program is required to meet before the first day of 
classes with a Learning Specialist in the Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning to 
arrange an acceptable class schedule of 12 to 16 credit hours and to create a personal academic 
success plan. A student in the Contractual Readmission Program also is required to enroll in 
and successfully complete EDHE 202, Fundamentals of Active Learning, and to earn a 2.20 



 The University of Mississippi   

Page 2 of 2 
 

semester GPA or higher in the returning semester.  A student who completes the Contractual 
Readmission Program requirements, but who earns a semester GPA of between 2.00 and 2.19 
may continue in the program to complete all requirements during the following semester.  
 
A student will be academically dismissed if the student fails to: 
 Achieve good standing, or 
 Achieve at least a 2.00 semester GPA on 12 or more hours, or 
 Complete all Contractual Readmission program requirements at the end of the second 

semester in the program. 

Both the suspension and the readmission will be recorded on the student’s permanent record.  No 
student shall be academically suspended unless he or she has been placed on probation for at least 
one semester.  
 
Academic Dismissal • If a student is on probation as a result of having returned from an academic 
suspension or dismissal, and fails to meet the 2.00 GPA retention standard for any semester, then 
he or she will be academically dismissed for one calendar year. For this calculation, an I mark will 
be computed as an F. The student may appeal for readmission at the end of this year; readmission 
will be determined by the Faculty Committee on Readmission Appeals, and is automatic for 
students who have been dismissed only one time. No student shall be academically dismissed from 
the university unless he or she has first been previously academically suspended or dismissed. 
 
Students who have been suspended or dismissed for longer than 48 months may wish to consider 
the Academic Restart option described in the Admission to the University chapter. 
 
Readmitted Students • A student who returns after an academic suspension or dismissal will 
automatically be on academic probation. No work earned elsewhere during the suspension or 
dismissal will be used either in the calculation of the candidate’s academic status, nor transferred 
as credit toward a degree.  
 
Part-time Students • Part-time students (those carrying fewer than 12 hours, graded and ungraded 
combined, per semester) on academic probation will stay on probation until the term in which they 
have attempted 12 or more hours since the last determination of status. At the end of that term, 
their status will be recalculated as if all the new work had been done in a single term, and a new 
status will be determined. 
 
Repeated Probation • A student who has been moved from probation to good standing will be 
subject to new academic action in accordance with the preceding rules exactly as if the student had 
never been previously placed on probation, suspended, or dismissed. 


