
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 4 

 

 

 

General Academic Regulations for Graduate Students 

The following academic regulations apply to all graduate programs. 

 
Grades • Students may receive quality grades of A, B, C, D, or F on graduate course work, but 

grades of D and F are not acceptable for graduate credit. In certain specifically designated courses, 

the mark of Z is given to indicate that a student has received graduate credit but has been assigned 

no quality grade in the course; however, in courses approved for the Z mark, instructors may assign 

the quality grade of F. The only other marks that may be assigned in courses approved for the Z 

mark are I or W. 

The nonquality mark of X designates courses in which the student is registered as an auditor. The 

nonquality mark of W is given to students to indicate withdrawal from the course. The I mark is 

given when, for unusual reasons acceptable to the instructor, course requirements cannot be 

completed within the enrollment period. 

Students receiving the mark of I are expected to complete the course no later than the last class day 

of the next regular semester (excluding summer terms). Following this deadline, the I will be 

computed as an F in establishing a student’s grade-point average. An I grade may not be removed 

by formally enrolling in the same course in a subsequent semester at this university or any other 

institution. Where a student has at least three outstanding I grades, the student is not permitted to 

enroll in additional courses until the number of temporary grades is reduced to fewer than three. 

Graduate students must maintain at least a B average on all graduate work undertaken. Where a 

student is required to take, as part of the degree program, more than 12 hours in an area outside the 

field of specialization, a B average must be presented in both areas, computed separately. Unless 

specifically approved to be otherwise, no grades or marks are given for courses designated as  

thesis, doctoral essay, or dissertation. In any situation in which a graduate student wishes to appeal  

a grade, he or she should contact the dean of the Graduate School for a copy of the Graduate School 

Appeal Procedure, which shall apply in this case. 

Good Standing and Probation • To be in good standing, graduate students are expected to 

maintain a B average. Students must have a 3.0 GPA on course work that is presented to satisfy 

requirements for a degree. Students whose grade-point average falls below 3.0 in any regular 

semester will be placed on probation and expected to improve their grades to an acceptable level 

before the end of their next period of enrollment. If the grade-point average of a graduate student 

for a semester or term has been unsatisfactory, the dean of the Graduate school may refuse 

permission for the student to register for further work or change the student’s classification. 

Repeating Courses • Grades for all courses taken by graduate students will remain a permanent 

part of their transcript. (That is, the forgiveness policy does not apply to graduate students.) Except 

for courses identified in the catalog as “may be repeated for credit,” no course may be repeated 

more than once, and no more than two courses may be repeated and applied toward a degree. In 

instances of repeated courses, the grade and credit hours for the second attempt will be used to 

determine eligibility to graduate. Departments may impose higher standards. For those courses that 

may be repeated for credit, the department offering the course would notify the registrar’s office to 

rename (or index as I/II, etc.) the course on students’ transcripts at each offering. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 

 

Discipline • The broad purpose underlying student discipline is to order university living in such a 
way that the interests of the student body as a whole and of the individuals comprising it are best 

served. The university reserves the right to sever the connection of any student with the university 

for appropriate reason. In any situation in which a graduate student wishes to appeal a charge of 

academic dishonesty, he or she should contact the dean of the Graduate School for a copy of the 

Graduate School Appeal Procedure, which shall apply in this case. 

Minimum/Maximum Enrollment and Definition of Full-Time • A minimum enrollment of 3 

hours is required of every graduate student in each regular semester and 1 hour during the summer 

session, including registration for thesis or dissertation. The maximum enrollment for a graduate 

student during a regular session is 15 semester hours, including thesis and dissertation. In the 

summer session, the student may register for no more than 6 semester hours each term. Additional 

restrictions may be imposed by academic departments. 

A graduate student registered for 9 or more graduate-level credit hours during the fall or spring 

semesters at the university is considered to be a full-time student. In a summer term, a graduate 

student registered for 4 or more semester hours is considered a full-time student though, to satisfy 

residence requirements, the student must enroll for a total of 9 hours during the summer session 

terms. 

Students receiving a full university Nonservice Fellowship must enroll for at least 9 hours per 

semester. Enrollments for students holding service appointments are governed by the following 

schedule: 

       Service requirement    Minimum enrollmentMaximum enrollment  
 

3/4 time (30 hours/week) 9 hours* 9 hours 
1/2 time (20 hours/week) 9 hours 12 hours** 
1/4 time (10 hours/week) 6 hours 12 hours 

Less than 1/4 time 3 hours 15 hours 

In order to be eligible to receive a partial tuition scholarship, graduate assistants must enroll for at 

least 9 hours of graduate credit. 

Withdrawal from a Course • Registration for a course makes the student responsible for attending 

that course until the course is completed or until, with the approval of the instructor and the dean of 

the Graduate School, the registrar authorizes withdrawal from the course. The last day that a student 

may withdraw from a class without a record of enrollment in each semester is listed in the 

Academic Calendar. 

 

Graduate Credit for Senior Undergraduates • Under certain conditions, University of 

Mississippi seniors within 15 semester hours of the bachelor’s degree may enroll for a maximum of 

3 semester hours of graduate courses at the 500 level, and seniors within 12 semester hours of the 

bachelor’s degree may enroll for a maximum of 6 semester hours of graduate courses at the 500 

level on which graduate credit will be given towards a degree program in the Graduate  
 

*Only 6 hours of which can be in course work, the balance being made up of enrollment in thesis, dissertation, or recital hours. 
**Only 9 hours of which can be in course work, the balance being made up of enrollment in thesis, dissertation, or recital hours. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 

 

School. The conditions are that the student must have an overall grade-point average of at least 

3.00 on the last 60 hours of undergraduate work and be otherwise qualified for admission to the 

Graduate School, that these courses must not be counted towards satisfying the requirements for the 

bachelor’s degree, and that the department chair concerned and the dean of the Graduate School 

must have approved the courses for graduate credit before the undergraduate enrolls in them. 

Whereas the general rule is that a maximum of 6 semester hours can be earned by an undergraduate 

for graduate credit, this maximum can be extended for specifically approved programs that are 

designed to accelerate a student's entry into a University of Mississippi master’s program. Courses 

taken by undergraduates for graduate credit must be designated with the suffix G. Under no 

circumstances may undergraduates enroll in courses at the 600 level or above. 

 
Transfer of Graduate Credit from Another Institution • A student may receive credit for work 
accomplished in recognized institutions upon the recommendation of the department and the 

approval of the dean of the Graduate School. Only courses for which the student received the grade 

of B or higher may be transferred. Transfer of credit from another institution will not be accepted 

for workshops, internships, and other courses of a similar nature, and for courses in which regular 

letter grades are not awarded. Grades from other institutions may not substitute for unsatisfactory 

grades earned at the university; nor may the grade of A or B earned at another institution be used to 

offset a lower grade earned at the university. Transfer work from another institution that constitutes 

an overload while enrolled as a full-time student at The University of Mississippi will not be 

accepted. 

All transfer of credit is subject to the following conditions: (1) The residence or degree credit 

requirement is not reduced. (2) The other graduate school must offer a graduate degree in the field 

in which the work has been completed. (3) The credit must be recommended by the student’s 

department in the university as specifically applicable to the student’s degree program. 

With department approval, a student may transfer up to one half, but no more than 12 hours, of the 

graded coursework credit hours required for a masters or specialist degree program (e.g., up to 12 

hours may be transferred if the degree program requires 24 hours of graded coursework, or up to 9 

hours if the degree program requires 18 hours of graded coursework). The 6-hour transfer policy 

also applies within the university. There is a six-year time limit on the applicability of transferred 

credit, as there is on all credits applicable towards the master’s degree. No work will be accepted  

for transfer to a doctoral program, but departmental doctoral program requirements may be waived 

or reduced as a result of graduate work completed at other institutions; however, Graduate School 

minimum degree requirements must be met. 

 
Transfer of University Graduate Credit to a Second Master’s Degree • A 6-hour transfer policy 

applies within the university. No more than 6 hours, subject to departmental approval, may be 

applied from a previous master’s degree to a second master’s degree. 

 
Application for a Degree • A student is expected to submit an application for a degree during the 

last semester or summer term of resident enrollment. If the student is not able to complete degree 

requirements at the end of that period, the student will resubmit the application during the semester 

or summer term at the end of which the student expects to graduate. A student must be formally 

admitted to the degree program prior to the beginning of the semester in which the degree is 

awarded and must meet the requirements of the catalog under which he or she was admitted or 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 4 

 

 

readmitted. 

 
Final Enrollment • All students planning to receive their graduate degrees must be enrolled for at 

least 3 hours (thesis, dissertation, or course work) during the fall or spring semester in which they 

take the final oral and/or written examination. Those planning to graduate during the summer must 

be enrolled for at least one hour. 


