
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Disposal of Laboratory Glassware 

Summary/Purpose:  The Lab Glassware Disposal Policy details the minimum requirements and 
procedures for the safe packaging and disposal of Broken Laboratory Glassware. 

Disposal of Laboratory Glassware  

NEVER place broken glassware in the normal trash. Several cuts or lacerations due to the 
improper disposal of laboratory glassware have recently been reported on the campus. In an 
effort to eliminate or minimize these injuries, certain procedures must be followed when 
discarding broken or unserviceable glassware. 

 Broken glassware should immediately be cleaned up. A laboratory should already have a
small brush and dust pan available to clean up after small accidents. Forceps or duct tape
can be used to pick up the smaller pieces of broken glass.

 Discarded glassware must not contain any Hazardous wastes, Medical Waste,
Pathological Waste or Radiological Wastes.

 If the glassware contains Hazardous wastes, Radiological Wastes, or is contaminated
with any Pathological or Biological materials, refer to the Sharps and Biological Waste
Disposal Flow Chart or call Laboratory Services (5433) for disposal instructions.

 If you have any questions about this policy, please contact Laboratory Services (5433).

Disposal Procedures

 Discarded glassware must be placed into a small puncture proof, double-lined cardboard
box, or a container specifically designed for the disposal of glassware.

 The box must be securely sealed with tape.
 Any cardboard box may be used, provided it is sturdy and of a size that will not weigh

more than 40 pounds when full.
 The container must be labeled as to the contents.

o CAUTION
o LABORATORY GLASSWARE ONLY!
o NO HAZARDOUS WASTE, NO MEDICAL WASTE, NO PATHOLOGICAL

WASTE, NO RADIOLOGICAL WASTES.

LAB PERSONNEL MUST PLACE THE CONTAINER DIRECTLY INTO THE 
BUILDING DUMPSTER. 

Never allow Custodial Service Personnel to handle broken glassware. 

 Never use laboratory glassware boxes for the disposal of:
o Sharps
o Biohazardous materials
o Liquid wastes
o Chemically contaminated laboratory glassware/plastic-ware
o Chemical containers that can't be disposed of as regular solid waste


