
Page 1 of 5 

 

The University of Mississippi 

 

Post-Tenure Review Policy 
 

I. Purpose, Principles, and Objectives 
 

A. Post-tenure review at the University of Mississippi is developmental in nature and shall be 

supported by institutional resources for professional development. It is intended to encourage 

intellectual vitality and proficient levels of performance by all members of the faculty throughout 

their careers. It is also designed to enhance public trust in the University by ensuring that the 

faculty community undertakes regular and rigorous efforts to hold all of its members accountable 

for high professional standards. 

 

The University of Mississippi recognizes that the granting of tenure for university faculty is a 

vital protection of free inquiry and open intellectual debate. This post-tenure review policy 

defines a system of periodic peer evaluation that is intended to enhance and protect the 

guarantees of tenure and academic freedom. It is expressly recognized that nothing in this policy 

alters or amends the University's policies regarding removal of tenured faculty members for 

cause (which are stipulated in the Handbook for Faculty and Staff) or shifts the burden of proof 

placed on the University in such actions. 

 

B. The following principles from the American Association of University Professors shall be 

considered a part of the University's post-tenure review policy, and all procedures developed 

and actions taken shall be in accordance with these principles. 

 

1. Post-tenure review must ensure the protection of academic freedom as defined in the 1940 

Statement of Principles. The application of its procedures, therefore, should not intrude on an 

individual faculty member's proper sphere of professional self-direction, nor should it be 

used as a subterfuge for effecting programmatic change. Such a review must not become the 

occasion for a wide-ranging fishing expedition in an attempt to dredge up negative evidence. 

 

2. Post-tenure review must not be a reevaluation or revalidation of tenured status as defined 

in the 1940 Statement. In no case should post-tenure review be used to shift the burden of 

proof from the institution's administration (to show cause why a tenured faculty member 

should be dismissed) to the individual faculty member (to show cause why he or she should 

be retained).   

 

3. The written standards and criteria by which faculty members are evaluated in post-tenure 

review should be developed and periodically reviewed by the faculty. The faculty should also 

conduct the actual review process. The basic standard for appraisal should be whether the 

faculty member under review discharges conscientiously and with professional competence 

the duties appropriately associated with his or her position, not whether the faculty member 

meets the current standards for the award of tenure as those might have changed since the 

initial granting of tenure. 



Page 2 of 5 

 

 

4. Post-tenure review should be developmental and supported by institutional resources for 

professional development or a change of professional direction. In the event that an 

institution decides to invest the time and resources required for comprehensive or "blanket" 

review, it should also offer tangible recognition to those faculty members who have 

demonstrated high or improved performance. 

 

5. Post-tenure review should be flexible enough to acknowledge different expectations in 

different disciplines and changing expectations at different stages of faculty careers. 

 

6. Except when faculty appeals procedures direct that files be available to aggrieved faculty 

members, the outcome of evaluations should be confidential, that is, confined to the 

appropriate college or university persons or bodies and the faculty member being evaluated, 

released otherwise only at the discretion or with the consent of the faculty member. 

 

7. If the system of post-tenure review is supplemented, or supplanted, by the option of a 

formal development plan, that plan cannot be imposed on the faculty member unilaterally, 

but must be a product of mutual negotiation. It should respect academic freedom and 

professional self-direction, and it should be flexible enough to allow for subsequent alteration 

or even its own abandonment. The standard here should be that of good faith on both sides--a 

commitment to improvement by the faculty member and to the adequate support of that 

improvement by the institution-- rather than the literal fulfillment of a set of non-negotiable 

demands or rigid expectations, quantitative or otherwise. 

 

8. A faculty member should have the right to comment in response to evaluations, and to 

challenge the findings and correct the record by appeal to an elected faculty grievance 

committee. He or she should have the same rights of comment and appeal concerning the 

manner of formulating, the content of, and any evaluation resulting from, any individualized 

development plan. 

 

9. In the event that recurring evaluations reveal continuing and persistent problems with a 

faculty member's performance that do not lend themselves to improvement after several 

efforts, and that call into question his or her ability to function in that position, then other 

possibilities, such as a mutually agreeable reassignment to other duties or separation should 

be explored. If these are not practicable, or if no other solution acceptable to the parties can 

be found, then the administration should invoke peer consideration regarding any 

contemplated sanctions. 

 

10. The standard for dismissal or severe sanction remains that of adequate cause, and the 

mere fact of successive negative reviews does not in any way diminish the obligation of the 

institution to show such cause for dismissal in a separate forum before an appropriately 

constituted hearing body of peers convened for that purpose. Evaluation records may be 

admissible but rebuttable as to accuracy. Even if they are accurate, the administration is still 

required to bear the burden of proof and demonstrate through an adversarial proceeding not 

only that the negative evaluations rest on fact, but also that the facts rise to the level of 

adequate cause for dismissal. The faculty member must be afforded the full procedural 

safeguards set forth in the 1958 Statement on Procedural Standards in Faculty Dismissal 



Page 3 of 5 

 

Proceedings and the Recommended Institutional Regulations on Academic Freedom and 

Tenure, which include, among others, the opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse 

witnesses.  

 

II. Procedures 
 

All tenured faculty members, including administrators, shall undergo a post-tenure review when 

he or she receives 3 "unsatisfactory" annual reviews in any period of 6 consecutive years, 

excluding years when the faculty member is on leave. For the purpose of this document, an 

annual review conducted by the Department Chair or Dean or Provost shall be deemed 

satisfactory unless the Chair's or Dean's or Provost's review states expressly that "for the purpose 

of post-tenure review, this shall be considered an unsatisfactory review." Post-tenure review for 

tenured faculty members holding administrative appointments will supplement, not substitute 

for, other assessments of their performance of administrative duties. It is the responsibility of the 

administrator conducting the annual review to determine when a post-tenure review is to be 

triggered and to be familiar with the pertinent evaluation criteria. 

 

A. Evaluation Criteria 

The standard for evaluation shall be whether the faculty member under review discharges 

conscientiously and with professional competence the duties associated with his or her 

position. Consistent with this standard, faculty in each department (or other relevant unit) 

establish guidelines for achieving tenure and expectations for performance of tenured faculty. 

The criteria for a post-tenure review will be those for the current rank and title of the faculty 

member, unless a more specific set of written criteria is approved by the appropriate dean and 

the office of the provost at least one calendar year prior to the application of a formal post-

tenure review of a faculty member.  

 

B. Documentation 

The following documentation shall constitute the post-tenure review of all faculty members: 

 

1) a copy of a current curriculum vitae; 

2) a copy of the faculty member's annual activity reports from each year since the previous 

review; 

3) a copy of the chair's annual evaluation of the faculty member and any available 

information about the faculty member's teaching effectiveness from each year since the 

previous review; 

4) copies of reviews of administrators by other administrators; and 

5) a concise cover memorandum from the faculty member summarizing his/her 

accomplishments in the areas of teaching, research, and service since the previous review and 

outlining his/her plans in these areas for the next six years. 

 

C. Review Committees and Procedures 

 

1) Department faculty Review 



Page 4 of 5 

 

 

a) Composition 

The department faculty level review is to be conducted by a committee of tenured, 

non-administrative, academic faculty of the department faculty in which the faculty member 

has primary appointment. The committee shall consist of at least three members. It is the 

responsibility of the department faculty to specify the composition of the review committee. 

For example, a department faculty may choose to employ a committee of the whole, a 

steering/advisory committee, or an ad hoc committee. 

 

The department faculty may have a single committee for all candidates in a given year, or 

may choose to constitute several committees for this purpose. For faculty members with joint 

appointments involving budgetary commitments from more than one department faculty, 

members representing the secondary department faculty shall be included on the committee, 

but the primary department faculty will in all cases have a majority of committee members. 

In cases in which a department faculty does not have three tenured, non-administrative, 

academic faculty members, an outside member (or members) shall be appointed by the 

department faculty head, with the approval of the relevant dean. 

 

b) Review 

After examining the documentation described above, the departmental faculty post-tenure 

review committee shall prepare a concise written report assessing the faculty member's 

performance based on the criteria outlined above. The committee's report shall include a 

notation indicating whether the faculty member's performance is judged to be satisfactory or 

unsatisfactory, a narrative text indicating the rationale for the assessment, and a record of the 

committee's vote. In the case of associate professors, the report shall also include guidance 

on activities that would enhance prospects for a successful promotion review. 

 

Copies of all reports shall be kept on file in the departmental faculty office and shall also be 

forwarded to the faculty member under review, the dean of the appropriate college or school, 

and to the Office of the Provost. 

 

In the case of an unsatisfactory review, the committee and the faculty member's Chair shall 

(after consultation with the appropriate unit head, dean, and faculty member) outline and 

communicate to the faculty member a formal, written plan for corrective action and 

professional development. This plan may include University resources to help the affected 

faculty member enhance research efforts or retool teaching skills. If the plan does include a 

requirement for additional resources or a change in the faculty member's assignment, this 

must be endorsed in writing by the pertinent administrator. The plan shall include 

clearly-defined and specific goals, an outline of and timetable for activities to be undertaken, 

and an agreed-upon monitoring strategy. 

 

Faculty members who receive unsatisfactory post-tenure reviews (and whose unsatisfactory 

reviews are upheld should they be appealed, for which see below) shall be reviewed again 

using the above procedure in the third year following the initial review. If this subsequent 



Page 5 of 5 

 

review results in a satisfactory rating by the departmental faculty committee, the affected 

faculty member's post-tenure review clock will be restarted at the beginning of a new 6-year 

period. If the subsequent review again yields an unsatisfactory rating (and this rating is 

upheld on appeal, for which see below), the matter shall be forwarded to the Office of the 

Provost for further appropriate action.  This action may include reassignment of the 

individual to a non-faculty position within the University or to initiate procedures for the 

termination of tenured faculty for just cause. 

 

 

2) University-level Appeal 

 

a) Composition 

 

Faculty who receive unsatisfactory post-tenure reviews from their departmental faculty 

committees may appeal these decisions to the University's Sabbatical Leave Review 

Committee. Such appeals must be filed, in writing, with the chair of the Committee on 

Academic Freedom and Faculty Responsibility within 15 working days of the faculty 

member's formal, written notification of a negative review. 

 

b) Review 

 

The Sabbatical Leave Review Committee shall have the authority to review all documents 

related to matters appealed to it and may, at its discretion, convene a hearing to reconsider an 

unsatisfactory evaluation. The committee shall have the authority to reverse an unsatisfactory 

evaluation, remand a matter to the appropriate departmental faculty committee for further 

evaluation, and amend plans for corrective professional development. The committee shall 

issue a written report outlining the rationale for its decisions, and shall forward copies of 

such decisions to the affected faculty member, departmental faculty chair, appropriate dean, 

and the Office of the Provost.  

 

 


