
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Radiological Waste Identification 
 
Summary/Purpose:  The Radiological Waste Identification Policy details the definition of 
Radiological Waste and the procedures for safe handling and preparation of Radioactive Waste 
Materials.  
 

Radiological Waste Identification 

The University of Mississippi generates Low-Level Radioactive Waste (LLW). This LLW 
includes items used in our research laboratories that have become contaminated with radioactive 
material, or have become radioactive through exposure to neutron radiation. This waste is 
comprised of used gloves, paper towels and wiping rags, pipette tips, tissue samples, filter 
papers, and biodegradable liquid scintillation fluids.  
 

Disposal Procedures: 

The responsibility for radioactive waste identification, labeling, and packaging rests with the 
Principal Investigator (PI). The PI must follow all of the procedures in the University policies 
and regulations, and must provide proper instruction to personnel under their supervision. 
 
The Sharps and Biological Waste Disposal Flow Chart details the required separation 
procedures for radiological wastes. 

All wastes are to be separated into solids, liquids, or gases by the user for pickup as follows:  

 Solid waste should not contain any free standing liquids.  
 Liquid wastes are to be separated into  

 aqueous (water-based materials containing no other hydrocarbon solvent 
capable of flammability), and,  

 organic (hydrocarbon solvents capable of being burned), and,  
 further segregated according to radioisotopes.   

 Aqueous liquids are to be bulked up into suitable containers which have secure, leak proof 
seals (caps) and are properly labeled.  

 Each container should contain only one radioisotope.  
 Contact the Radiation Protection Specialist (RPS) prior to the production 

of any liquid waste containing multiple isotopes. 
 Scintillation fluids are to be left in individual scintillation vials, tightly capped.  
 Organic liquids containing radioisotopes will have to be evaluated on a case by case basis by 

the RPS to determine the best method of packaging. 
 A “Request for Disposal of Radioactive Materials” (DHS Form 14) must be submitted to the 

RPS for review prior to the removal of materials that are properly packaged, labelled and 
ready for collection. 

  


