
The University of Mississippi 

 

Indoor Space Reservations – University Users 

Summary/Purpose: Outlines process for making room reservations on campus for student 

organizations and campus departments as well as the associated fee structure.  

GENERAL  

There have been rooms identified on campus that are available for use by university-affiliated 

organizations and student groups. Reservations can be made for these rooms only by calling the 

Ole Miss Student Union Reservations Office at (662)915-7459. Rooms must be reserved a 

minimum of 24 hours in advance of use. The reservation window opens on July 1 for the current 

fiscal year. No reservations are accepted for dates after June 30 of the current fiscal year. 

The hours of use vary between buildings and are included within the terms of use for each space. 

Reservations are not accepted for events starting after 8:00 PM except for official university 

functions.  

Groups are responsible for contacting the Ole Miss Student Union Reservations Office to make 

semester long or reoccurring reservations. No reservations will be made on an “automatic” basis.  

Reservations will not be accepted for dates on home football weekends beginning at 5:00 p.m. on 

the Friday preceding the Saturday football game until 9:00 a.m. the Sunday following the game. 

For social events sponsored by registered student organizations, a copy of the completed Social 

Event Registration Form is required to complete the reservation. This form can be found on 

OrgSync.om. If the form is not received before the social event is scheduled to begin, the 

reservation will be canceled (see Security and Sponsor Responsibilities below).  

Once a reservation has been made, a confirmation will be faxed or emailed to the contact person. 

Reservations are not confirmed until a notification has been sent. 

It is then that person’s responsibility to check the reservation for correct date/s, time, room, and 

set-up needs. The group is also responsible for notifying the Ole Miss Student Union 

Reservations Office if they decide to cancel their event. 

Providing inaccurate or incomplete information to the Ole Miss Student Union Reservations 

Office staff could result in denial of the request or cancellation of the event.  

Fronting is prohibited. Fronting is when an individual or organization uses university 

space/facilities and services under the guise that the activity is a university-sponsored program. 

Violator’s will have their reservation privileges revoked. 

The use of alcohol and illegal drugs is strictly prohibited.  



The University of Mississippi 

 

No items of any nature may be attached to the walls of any space. This includes pins, posters, 

balloons, tape or any other type of adhesive. In addition, the use of glitter and confetti is strictly 

prohibited. Groups will be charged for damage to rooms and/or equipment and for excessive 

clean-up.  

In the event that the university suspends campus activities or closes, the table reservation will be 

canceled, and the user will have the opportunity to reschedule. 

Spaces are not considered “reserved” until a confirmation has been sent from the Ole Miss Student 

Union Reservations Office. 

A 24-hour cancellation notice must be given for all canceled events. Failure to give an adequate 

cancellation notice may result in denial of future reservations.  

Any request submitted without a valid university account number or Visa/MasterCard number 

will not be processed. 

Failure to provide a valid account number before the date of the event will result in cancellation 

of the space reservation.  

Events after 5:00 p.m. during the week and all events held during the weekends may require 

security present during entirety of event at the discretion of the Ole Miss Student Union. Security 

is required at all dances and social events in the Student Union sponsored by recognized student 

organizations with 20 or more people expected to attend. Security must be provided by a 

recognized, bonded agency and approved by the University Police Department. Users of the 

facility must abide by University regulations and federal, state, and local laws. Security 

personnel have authority to close any event when safety or security is at risk.  

Organizational and individual sponsors are responsible for the following:  

• Ensure groups limit activities to their assigned area of the Student Union; 

• Ensure proper conduct of all attendees, including children; 

• Cover the costs of any extra service; 

• Restore immediately and/or pay costs (including labor) arising out of use of the facility 

for any and all claims of damage. Student Union Reservations Office reserves the right to 

access additional fees, require forfeiture of any fees/deposits, and/or deny future usage of 

the facility for failure to comply; 

• Adhere to the prescribed times for the start and the end of the activity.  

The Ole Miss Student Union Reservations Office reserves the right to involve the University 

Police Department in the documentation of any damage to the facility.  


