
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

 

Student Group Travel 
 

Summary/Purpose:  How to process authorizations and reimbursements for students traveling 

as a group. 

 

Student groups may be advanced travel funds to cover expenses.  When a University employee is 

traveling with students, the employee will be the custodian of the funds. If a group of students 

are traveling together without a University employee accompanying them, a student may be 

designated as custodian. The group must understand that all guidelines requiring original 

itemized receipts are applied to this travel. A list of all individuals that are participating must be 

attached with the Travel Authorization that is submitted. 

 

Travel Advances for Student Group Travel 

To ensure that the funds will be available, the request for the advance must be prepared and 

submitted to Procurement Services no later than 10 days prior to departure.  

 

Upon return from the travel the custodian should submit a Travel Reimbursement Voucher with 

an itemized list of expenses. Advances must be settled within 30 days of the last day of the trip. 

If the advance is not settled timely, student advances will be charged to the custodial student’s 

bursar account for collection and employee advances will be payroll deducted from the next 

scheduled pay period. 

 

 Meals - Actual costs not exceeding the maximum meal allowance for the area traveled per 
student. For the group meal an itemized meal receipt must be obtained from the restaurant. No 

reimbursement will be issued without this receipt.  A list of the individuals who participated in 

that meal must accompany the receipt. 

 

 Meal Tips – 20% of the actual meal cost, not to exceed the maximum daily meal allowance. 
 

 Lodging – The original itemized receipt showing room rate and all applicable charges. 
Individual’s names must be listed showing what charges apply to each student. 

 

 Taxi, Shuttle, Parking and Tolls - Actual Cost - Original receipt required over $10.00 per 
claim. No reimbursement will be issued for amounts over $10.00 without the required itemized 

receipt. 

 

 Baggage charges – Actual Cost – Original receipt required over $10.00 per claim. 
 

 Gasoline - Actual costs with original itemized receipt. 
 

 Airfare - Actual costs with original itemized paid receipt. Internet fares must have the payment 
confirmation and the e-ticket. 

 

 Rental Car - Please refer to our In-State Rental Car as well as our Out-of-State Rental Car state 
contracts for obtaining a rental car. The original itemized paid receipt is required. 

 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/in-state-contract-rental-car-rates/
http://procurement.olemiss.edu/out-of-state-rental-car-contracts/

