
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Procedures for Vacating a Laboratory 

 

Summary/Purpose:  The Policy on Vacating a Laboratory detail the minimum procedures and 
requirements to remove all hazardous substances from a laboratory area and ensure that an area 
is free from hazardous contamination. 

This policy apply to ALL laboratories, darkrooms, stockrooms, shops, research / teaching / 
maintenance facilities, and any other area where hazardous materials are used or stored. 
 
The Principal Investigator, it is the Supervisor / Faculty Member's responsibility to ensure 
that all areas they supervise are properly decontaminated before the research staff vacates. 
 
Biological and Pathological Materials:  

 Disinfect work surfaces that may be contaminated with biological agents. 
 Autoclave and dispose of unwanted biological agents in appropriate containers. 
 All sharps (needles, pipets, lancets, broken glass, etc.) must be placed in puncture proof 

containers for disposal. 
 All waste must be clearly labeled and Laboratory Services (LS) (5433) must be contacted 

for removal. 
 Refer to Sharps and Biological Waste Disposal Flow Chart. 

Hazardous Materials and Chemicals:  

 All chemicals must be labeled and sealed. 
 All waste must be clearly labeled and Laboratory Services (5433) must be contacted for 

removal. 
 Wipe all surfaces and equipment with a warm solution of soap and water. This includes 

fume hoods, bench tops, refrigerators, sinks and floors. 

Radioactive Materials and Radiation Generating Devices:  

 A wipe test must be done on all surfaces and equipment where radioactive materials have 
been used.  Please submit this data to Laboratory Services (5433). 

 Radioactive waste must be properly packaged. Contact LS to request disposal of 
Radioactive Materials. 

 Remove all "Radioactive" labeling and signs from equipment once it is decontaminated. 
 The lab will be certified as Declassified by LS when: 

1. All Lab equipment has been decontaminated and surveyed, 
2. All Radioactive materials are removed and secured,  and 
3. All survey results are accepted and approved by LS. 


