
The University of Mississippi 

Central Storage Facility 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To provide guidelines and procedures to departments requesting air 
conditioned and/or non-air conditioned storage space for University records, property, or 
equipment.  Shredder services are available at the Central Storage Facility. 
 
GENERAL 
 
Contact the Provost’s Office who assigns storage space for use by University departments. 
 
The University of Mississippi Physical Plant Department maintains a Central Storage Facility for 
departments to store records, documents, and limited furniture/equipment. 
 
The Central Storage Facility is open from 7:30 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. Monday thru Friday except 
when the University is officially closed. 
 
The Central Storage Facility is located at the Physical Plant Complex and has 10,000 square feet 
of Low Bay Storage (Wire Cages) with heating and cooling.  Also, there are 10,000 square feet 
of High Bay Storage that has no heating and cooling. 
 
The Low Bay (Wire Cage) storage area is divided into 66 cages with individually keyed locks. 
 
Office, labs, or meeting space is not available in the Central Storage Facility. 
 
The Physical Plant Department is not responsible for damage or loss to items stored in the 
Central Storage Facility. 
 
The Physical Plant Department maintains security and video surveillance at the Central Storage 
Facility. 
 
Department designees must be present or provide written authorization for anyone to enter the 
departments’ designated storage space. 
 
Shredder.  A paper shredder is available to dispose of records containing sensitive information. 
 
GUIDELINES 
 
The Office of the Provost assigns storage space to the University departments.  See instructions 
below. 
 
The Physical Plant determines what items or materials departments can store in the Central 
Storage Facility.  Items prohibited from being stored in the facility are listed on the attached 
Storage Form-Access List (see page 6). 
 
Departments should call the Physical Plant (7051) to obtain clearance of questionable items 
before bringing them to or having items picked up for storage in the Central Storage Facility.   

Page 1 of 8 



The University of Mississippi 

It is desirable that a department designee be present when storing items in designated room(s). 
 
Department designee will complete and sign a Central Storage Facility Storage Form-Access List 
(see page 6 of this policy).  The signed form certifies prohibited items are not being stored.  
Also, personnel listed on the form have been authorized to have card swipe access to the Low 
Bay Cage OR entry access to the High Bay Storage Facility. 
 
LOW BAY AREA (WIRE CAGES) 
 
The Low Bay Storage area which is heated and cooled has 66 wire cages that are approximately 
10 ft. x 11 ft.  The wire storage cages have doors with individual key locks.  A sample 
arrangement for filing cabinets is attached at page 7. 
 
Departments will have 24 hour access to the Low Bay Building using an electronic card swipe at 
the door.  The department must have their cage key to access their assigned wire cage. 
 
The Provost Office assigns space to departments.  Multiple storage cages may be assigned to 
departments based on storage requirements.  Departments requiring less space may share a 
storage cage with another department.  Lockable file cabinets are highly recommended when 
storage cages are shared. 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
The Provost Office: 
 
 Sends an SAP Notification to the Physical Plant identifying space that has been assigned 
to a department which includes the department contact person and phone number; 
  
 Notifies the department as to what space it has been assigned; 
 
 Directs the department to send an SAP Notification to Physical Plant if they need 
assistance moving; 
 
 Directs the departments to complete and forward (or FAX) the combination Storage 
Form-Access List to both the ID Center and Physical Plant.  (ID Center has to be copied so they 
know building access has been approved by the Provost). 
 
The Physical Plant: 
 
 Converts Provost’s notification to a work order for the Physical Plant Lock Shop to cut 2 
keys at PPD expense for each assigned wire cage (replacement keys will be charged to the 
departments on this work order); Physical Plant Lock Shop will maintain records of keys issued 
and notify departments when their keys are ready for pick up; 
 

Lock Shop will collect Storage Form-Access List before issuing keys to wire cages. 
 

Page 2 of 8 



The University of Mississippi 

 In the event that entry into the Central Storage Facility is not available through card 
access (from the ID Center), personnel can check out an outside entry key from the Physical 
Plant Lock Shop.  This can only be done if the person’s name is listed under the Low Bay Wire 
Cages Names heading on the “Central Storage Facility Combination Storage Form-Access List”.  
If the person’s name is not listed on that form they can then fill out an “Outside Entry Key 
Request Form” (see page 8) from the Physical Plant Lock Shop to temporarily check out an 
outside entry key.  The outside entry key must immediately be returned to the Physical Plant 
Lock Shop upon leaving the storage facility. 
 
University Departments: 
 
 Will send an SAP Notification to Physical Plant if they need Physical Plant to move 
items to the wire cages; 
 
 Departments will provide (or FAX) a list of names of personnel authorized for card 
access to both Physical Plant Lock Shop and the ID Center; 
 
 Departments are responsible for notifying Physical Plant and the ID Center when 
employees’ access has been cancelled due to retirement or any change in status which no longer 
requires the employee’s access to the storage area.  Keys must be recovered and returned to PPD. 
 
 Departments are responsible for keeping cage(s) neat and organized. 
 
I.D. Center: 
 
 Active University I.D. Cards for individuals listed in the “Low Bay Wire Cage” column 
of the Combination Storage Form-Access List.  Terminate access when notified by departments 
to do so. 
 
HIGH BAY STORAGE AREA 
 
Access to the High Bay Storage area is during normal office hours (7:30 AM – 4:30 PM, 
Monday thru Friday).  Departments must contact Physical Plant for access to the building (only 
PPD key entry is available). 
 
The High Bay Storage area consists of 10,000 square feet and is not heated or cooled.  Large 
racks are available to handle palletized materials. 
 
Items stored in the High Bay Storage racks will be stored on pallets for ease of movement by 
forklift or pallet jack.  The Physical Plant will provide pallets. 
 
The Provost Office assigns space to departments.  Multiple storage racks may be assigned to 
departments based on storage requirements. 
 
 
 

Page 3 of 8 



The University of Mississippi 

PROCEDURES 
 
The Provost Office: 
 
 The Provost Office sends an SAP Notification to Physical Plant identifying space that has 
been assigned to departments which includes the department contact person and phone number; 
 
 Notifies department what space it has been assigned; 
 

Directs the department to send an SAP Notification to Physical Plant if they need 
assistance moving; 
 
 Directs department to complete and forward (or FAX) the combination Storage Form-
Access List to Physical Plant of people having authorization to access the space. 
 
The Physical Plant: 
 
 PPD converts the Provost’s notifications to a work order for PPD Storeroom; 
 
 PPD Storeroom will escort authorized individuals (See Combination Storage Form-
Access List) into the High Bay Storage Facility.  Individuals must be on the Access List 
provided by the department to gain access to the storage area.  The Storeroom will not check out 
keys to individuals. 
 
University Departments: 
 
 Will send an SAP Notification to Physical Plant if they need PPD to move items to the 
storage facility.  This is done at the department’s expense; 
 
 Departments will provide (or FAX) a list of names of personnel authorized for access to 
Physical Plant Storeroom.  (Use the Combination Storage Form-Access List on page 6). 
 
 Departments are responsible for notifying Physical Plant when employees’ access has 
been cancelled due to retirement or any change in status which no longer requires the employee’s 
access to the storage area. 
 
SHREDDER SERVICES 
 
Physical Plant has a shredder located in the Central Storage Facility. 
 
Departments having sensitive documents containing social security numbers or other information 
requiring special handling may now have those documents shredded by Physical Plant. 
 
Send an SAP Notification for pickup.  PPD crews will take documents, shred, and recycle. 
 

Page 4 of 8 



The University of Mississippi 

There is a minimum charge for the service.  Large shredding jobs will be based on an hourly rate.  
Questions may be directed to the Physical Plant Work Order Desk at 7003. 
 
Documents stored in the Wire Cages can be shredded with an SAP Notification to Physical Plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 5 of 8 



The University of Mississippi 

 

 
 

Page 6 of 8 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 7 of 8 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 8 of 8 

 


