
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Fume Hood Maintenance Procedures 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Fume Hood Maintenance Procedures Policy details the minimum 
requirements and procedures to properly prepare to work on, or repair, a fume hood. 
 
 
Fume Hood Maintenance Procedures  

The following safety procedures are recommended for any personnel performing maintenance on 
laboratory fume hoods and its exhaust components.  
   

 Assume that the duct lining, fume hood lining and all internal exhaust components are 
potentially contaminated with chemical residues. 

 Generally, maintenance personnel will not be working with the internal hood 
components. 

 If potential contamination is suspected, maintenance personnel must contact Laboratory 
Services (LS) (915-5433) for assistance. 

 The Lab Supervisor or Department Chair must be contacted and informed before 
maintenance is performed on their fume hood. 

 The Lab workers will need time to contain or remove all hazardous materials from the 
fume hood. 

 If work is to be performed on the portion of the fume hood within the lab, it may need to 
be decontaminated before work can begin. 

 If radioactive materials are used in the hood, the maintenance personnel may request that 
LS (915-5433) perform a survey of the hood before maintenance work begins. 

 On the day the work is to be performed, maintenance personnel must post the hood with 
the red "Attention--This Hood Is Being Repaired" notice and fill in the appropriate 
information. 

 It is important that this notice is easily visible by all lab workers that may use the fume 
hood. 

 Nitrile gloves, eye protection and chemical resistant coveralls (Tyvek™) may be 
necessary if contact with internal components is required. 

 When working around sharp objects like sheet metal, wear appropriate outer work gloves 
in addition to inner Nitrile gloves. 

 Eye protection is especially important when working on systems, which are in operation. 
 Special care must be used when working on energized systems. 
 Prior approval of your supervisor and special procedures may be needed before working 

on energized systems. 
 Since other exhaust systems from the building may be operational, a chemical cartridge 

respirator should be worn during all roof top maintenance. 
 Note: Before respirators are to be used, you must determine which type of respirator is 

needed and how it should be properly fitted. 
 For help in respirator selection and use, please call LS (915-5433). 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

 Workers should always wear protective eye wear (goggles) when working near 
operational hood exhaust vents. 

 After the work is completed, the Nitrile gloves should be discarded and hands should be 
washed with soap and water. 

 The Red Hood Repair Notice should be removed from the fume hood after the hood has 
been certified it is operating effectively. 
 

 If any assistance is needed in reviewing the hazards present in any fume hood, please call 
Laboratory Services (LS) (915-5433) for assistance. 

 


