
Page 1 of 2 

 

The University of Mississippi 

 

University of Mississippi  

Extra and Supplemental Compensation Plan for Faculty and Staff 
 

This policy applies to all full-time faculty, including tenure/tenure track, non-tenure track, 

research track, and instructional track (i.e., EEO 1 and 2), and to professional administrative staff 

(EEO 3) during their standard contract period (9 months or 12 months).  This policy establishes 

general guidelines for using University funds to provide additional compensation to faculty and 

staff beyond their base salaries.  Extra compensation is defined as relating to work performed that 

is beyond the duties assigned to the position.  Supplemental compensation is defined as an 

augmentation due to outstanding performance of assigned duties.    

 

In all cases, extra or supplemental compensation must be approved through administrative 

channels.  A faculty/staff member cannot in any circumstance be the sole determinate of his or her 

own additional compensation. 

 

The additional duties associated with extra compensation must not interfere with the ability 

of the individual to carry out the duties associated with his or her base salary.  This policy is based 

on the assumption that the job expectations associated with the base salary for a faculty or staff 

member have been established.  This may be done through the job description, appointment letter, 

annual performance reviews, tenure and promotion guidelines, or other memoranda. 

 

Extra Compensation  
Extra compensation applies to duties undertaken or assigned that are beyond the ordinary 

duties of the individual.  In general, these are overload situations.  Examples include: 

$ a full-time faculty member who chooses to teach a course off-campus or in a mode 
that is outside the standard teaching assignment (e.g., at night, summer session, 

intersession, independent study, or Ole Miss On-Line), or on a topic outside that 

covered by the faculty member=s appointment (e.g., LIBA 102).  These examples 
do not apply in cases where the teaching assignments are part of the standard 

teaching assignment of the individual faculty member or a typical faculty member 

in the department (i.e., teaching night, weekend, on-line, or off-campus courses 

may be a standard teaching assignment in some departments). 

$ a faculty member who takes on administrative duties (e.g., chair, dean, director, 
etc.) may receive an administrative supplement for the extra duties; see the salary 

conversion policies in the Faculty and Staff Handbook regarding the case of a 

faculty member assuming a departmental chair position. 

$ a faculty or staff member who takes on additional research or service activities, of a 
non-recurring nature, beyond the duties associated with the base salary.  

(Additional research or service activities that are recurring in nature are considered 

a change in job description.) 

$ a staff member (with no assigned teaching in his or her job description) who 
teaches a course or takes on other duties outside the normal assignment.  A 

professional staff member who takes on such additional duties for extra 

compensation will be required to continue to put in full work week hours.  If such 



Page 2 of 2 

 

activities (and extra compensation) are approved, the approval must include a plan 

for maintaining the expected duties and the full work week hours.  That is, a 

professional staff member cannot be granted both extra compensation and time off 

from regular duties.  

! Extra compensation should not be more than 30% of the individual=s base salary 
rate for any month.  Extra compensation associated with teaching summer or 

intersession courses is an exception to this guideline, due of the accelerated nature 

of the activity.  

 

 
Supplemental Compensation 

Supplemental compensation may apply to a variety of situations in which a faculty or 

professional staff member receives a supplement to his/her Astate base@ salary for performing 
within the normal range of duties associated with the position.  This supplement may be 

associated with outstanding performance (i.e., teaching or research awards) and may thus be 

temporary in nature.  Alternatively, the supplement may Abuild@ the base salary of an individual 
by adding to the Astate base.@  Examples of the latter include endowed chair positions, in which 
external funds are added to state dollars to build the total base salary for an individual. 

 

Supplemental compensation (except in the situation regarding building a base salary) will 

be temporary in nature and either may be given as a lump sum (e.g., awards) or may be stretched 

over one or more semesters.  Guidelines for the selection of individuals to receive supplemental 

compensation (award types) should be established and should approved by the Provost.  Unless 

the Provost has indicated otherwise, individual selections should be approved through the level of 

the Provost. 

 

The source of the supplemental compensation may be any type of funding under control of 

the University.  

 

Cases of supplemental and extra compensation, including work expectations and the 

approval steps, should be documented using Human Resources forms (e.g.,  e-form 11 for 

Research during Intersessions or Summer Months or e-form 40, Request for Additional Pay, for 

various awards or for extra teaching assignments). 

 

Relationship with OMB Circular A-21.  
! Nine month faculty may pay themselves a maximum of 3/9 of their nine-month salary 

during the summer months from all University sources, including grants and contracts. 

! A faculty or staff member who is PI on a grant or contract may not pay him/herself extra or 
supplemental compensation using the contract or grant as the source, unless this is 

approved by the funding agency as part of the proposal. 

! A faculty or staff member may earn salary from a grant at greater than his or her normal 
monthly base salary if he or she performs extra duties that are across departmental lines 

(consistent with OMB Circular A-21).  


