
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 4 

Policy on Policy Management 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Purpose of this policy is to describe essential elements of all 
University Policies; to define the manner in which University Policies are maintained and 
published; to promote the regular review of University Policies; to require University 
Administrative Divisions to describe the manner in which University Policies are initiated, 
developed, approved, and amended; and to make clear that a departmental policy or procedure 
that is inconsistent with a University Policy in the Policy Directory is ineffective and 
unenforceable. 
 

POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
 

1. Definition of Terms. 
Responsible Office: Responsible Office is the University office, department or official 
that is the primary contact for questions concerning the implementation and 
administration of a particular University Policy. The Responsible Office also assures that 
a particular University Policy is reviewed consistent with that University Policy’s 
Scheduled Review. The Responsible Office is typically the office, department or official 
at the University that is most directly responsible for implementing and administering a 
particular University Policy. 
 
University Policy: A policy or practice adopted and approved consistent with the 
requirements of this Policy that has broad applicability beyond the internal operating 
procedures of a single office, department, or division. 
 
Administrative Divisions: The primary administrative divisions of the University, 
including the Office of the Chancellor, Academic Affairs, Student Affairs, 
Administration and Finance, Research and Sponsored Programs, and Athletics. 
 
Policy Manager: The individual designated by the Chancellor to serve as Policy 
Manager will provide advice at the beginning of the policy development process.  The 
Policy Manager will review a proposed policy and provide advice regarding whether it 
supports the mission of the University and is consistent with other University policies and 
applicable law. 
 

2. Delegation of Policy-Making Authority. 
 

The Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning (“IHL”) has delegated 
authority to the Chancellor of the University to enact certain University Policies and, 
where IHL approval is necessary, to initiate or recommend University Policies for IHL 
approval. University Policies are initiated, developed, and adopted according to the 
process and consistent with the requirements of this Policy. 
 
The IHL has also authorized the Chancellor to delegate policy-making authority, in 
writing, to appropriate and responsible University offices. For particular types or 
categories of University Policies, the Chancellor may, through the adoption of an 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 4 

appropriate University Policy pursuant to this Policy, delegate to appropriate and 
responsible University offices or officials the authority to initiate, develop, adopt, and 
revise discrete categories of University Policies, and where appropriate, recommend 
changes to discrete categories of University Policies to the IHL for approval. 
 

3. Maintenance and Publications of University Policies. 
 

The University’s Policy Manager shall maintain an original and the revision history of all 
University Policies. The Policy Manager shall work with Office of Information 
Technology to publish and maintain on the University’s website a searchable electronic 
Policy Directory of all University Policies. This Policy Directory shall include a link to 
the Policies and Bylaws of the Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning. 

 
4. All University Policies To Include Certain Information. 

 
University Policies shall include the following information, some of which may be 
assigned to a policy by the Policy Manager: 
 
Policy name 
 

Summary/Purpose of Policy  

Effective Date Related University Policies, if any 
 

Status  
 

Related external policies, statues, or resources 
 

UM Policy Code 
 

Supersedes and revision history 

Responsible Office 
 

Definitions or terms in policy 

Administrative Division 
 

External approval, if required 

People Affected 
 

Policy Statement (as pdf attachment) 

   
The University Policy Directory (https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/docs/pdf-
format.doc) provides a template for submitting and revising policies. 
 

5. Development and Approval of University Policies. 
 
Unless otherwise provided in another, more specific University Policy for the 
development and approval of a particular category or type of University Policy, 
University Policies are initiated, developed, and approved according to the following 
process. 

a. Policy Idea. If a member of the University community (“Proposing Member”) 
wishes to propose a new policy or a change to an existing policy (“Policy Idea”), 
the Proposing Member shall submit the Policy Idea to the Responsible Office. If 
the Proposing Member is not certain which University office, official, or 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 4 

department is the Responsible Office, then the Proposing Member shall submit 
the Policy Proposal to the head to the Administrative Division that the Proposing 
Member believes would be most directly responsible for implementing and 
administering the Policy Idea. When the head of an Administrative Division 
receives a Policy Idea, the Administrative Division head shall determine the 
Responsible Office for the Policy Idea. 

b. Proposal Evaluation. The Responsible Office shall initially determine if the Policy 
Idea has merit and whether to further develop and pursue the Policy Idea. The 
Responsible Office shall consult with the Policy Manager during the Proposal 
Evaluation stage of the process. If the Responsible Office determines that the 
Policy Idea does not have merit and should not be further developed and adopted, 
the Responsible Office shall report this determination to the head of the 
Administrative Division to which the Responsible Office reports. 

c. Policy Development. If the Responsible Office or the head of the Administrative 
Division to which the Responsible Office reports determines that the Policy Idea 
has merit, the Responsible Office shall develop a Policy Proposal based upon the 
Policy Idea. In developing a Policy Proposal, the Responsible Office shall consult 
with appropriate University Standing Committees, University departments, 
offices or officials, and University advisory or representative bodies as may be 
necessary to provide appropriate expertise or input from various University 
constituencies. 

d. Policy Approval. After the Responsible Office has developed the Policy Proposal, 
the Responsible Office shall submit the Policy Proposal to the head of the 
Administrative Division to which the Responsible Office reports for consideration 
on the policy template found at the University’s Policy Directory, 
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/docs/pdf-format.doc. If the head of the 
Administrative Division determines that the Policy Proposal has been fully 
developed and is ready for consideration by the Chancellor, the Administrative 
Division Head may submit the Policy Proposal to the Chancellor. The Chancellor 
may approve the Policy Proposal, reject the Proposal, or return the Policy 
Proposal to the Responsible Office for additional development or consideration. 

e. Submission of University Policies to Policy Manager. After a policy has been 
approved by the Chancellor, the Administrative Division Head shall forward the 
University Policy on the policy template found on the University’s policies 
webpage, https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/docs/pdf-format.doc, to the 
Policy Manager, who will oversee publication and maintenance consistent with 
Section 2 of this Policy. In the event that external approval is required for a 
particular University Policy, the Administrative Division Head shall submit the 
University Policy to the appropriate external entity for its consideration and 
approval. Until external approval is received by the Administrative Head and 
forwarded to the Policy Manager, the Policy Manager shall publish the University 
Policy with its Status “pending” rather than “effective”. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 4 

6. Alternative Process for Proposal, Development, and Approval of Certain Categories 
of University Policies. 

 
Any University Policy that delegates the authority to propose, develop, or approve certain 
categories of University Policies to an appropriate University office or official shall 
include the following information: 
a. Definition of the discrete category of University Policies affected. 
b. The manner that one may propose an idea for a policy or change to an existing policy. 

For example, who may propose or suggest an idea for a new policy or a policy 
change? How does one propose an idea for a new policy or a policy revision? 

c. Responsible Office. To which University office or official does one propose a policy 
idea? Who evaluates a policy idea to determine if it has merit? 

d. Policy Development. If an idea for a new policy or policy change has merit, how and 
by whom is a proposed policy developed? What groups on campus may need to be 
consulted in developing the policy? 

e. Policy Approval. Once a proposed policy is developed, who must approve the policy 
before it becomes a University Policy and is forwarded to the Policy Manager for 
maintenance and publication? 

 
Where a University Policy delegates discrete policy-making authority consistent with this 
Section 6, the specific provisions set forth in that University Policy shall apply rather 
than the general provisions set forth in Section 5 above. 

 
7. Preemption of University Policies. 

 
A University Policy in the Policy Directory supersedes and preempts inconsistent policies 
and procedures that are not included in the Policy Directory.  To be effective, a policy 
must be included in the Policy Directory. 
 

8. Regular Review of University Policies. 
 

Before approval of any proposed University Policy, the proposed University Policy shall 
be assigned a Responsible Office. In most instances, the Responsible Office shall be the 
University office most directly responsible for implementing and administering the 
policy. Each University Policy shall have a regular schedule for review (“Scheduled 
Review”) by the Responsible Office, in conjunction with the Policy Manager, to assure 
that the policy remains useful and consistent with applicable federal and state laws and 
regulations, IHL Policies and Bylaws, and other University Policies. If the Responsible 
Office determines that changes to a University Policy are necessary or prudent as a part 
of the Scheduled Review or at any other time, the Responsible Office may propose a 
policy change consistent with this Policy. 

 


