
Page 1 of  1

The University of Mississippi

Courses of Instruction

In the Graduate and Undergraduate Catalogs and the Academic Structure are listed and described
all courses taught in the schools and departments of the University except for the School of Law
(see the Law School Bulletin) and the various schools at the University of Mississippi Medical
Center in Jackson (see the Bulletin of the University of Mississippi Medical Center).  

The courses are presented by departments or programs and are listed alphabetically.  The subject
name (the heading in large bold type) together with the course number constitutes the official
designation of the course for the purposes of registration and official records.  The official course
title also appears in all capitals following the course number.  The figures in parentheses after the
course description denote the number of semester hours of credit for the course.  Subtitles
indicate subdivisions within the department and form no part of the actual course description.

The following is the course numbering system used by the University.

1-99 Courses that accrue no credit toward a degree; these courses do count toward a
student’s gpa

100-299 Lower Division courses

300-499 Upper Division or Advanced courses; open to students who are classified as
sophomores or higher; open to freshmen by permission of the department offering
the course

500-599 Courses open (as graduate credit) to graduate students and (as undergraduate
upper division credit) to undergraduate students who are classified as juniors or
seniors

 
600-799 Courses open only to graduate students

Prerequisites are listed for some courses.  A student may not take a course unless these
prerequisites have been met.  Exceptions can be made only in special cases with the prior consent
of the instructor, the department chair, and the dean.  A student who has failed one semester of a
continuous sequence (such as Engl 101, 102; Math 261, 262, 263, 264; or Span 101, 102, 201,
202) may not enroll in a subsequent course in that sequence until the failed course has been
passed.


	Page 1

