
1

The University of Mississippi

INTERLIBRARY LOAN POLICIES

Purpose
To provide members of the University community with research materials not owned by libraries
on this campus.

Eligible Users
Interlibrary loan service is available to faculty, staff, graduate students, and undergraduate
students under the guidance of a faculty member.

ILL Hours
The Interlibrary Loans Department is staffed to provide service between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. The department is located on the first floor (Room 105)
of J.D. Williams Library. Phone: (662) 915-5867; Fax: (662) 915-5453.  ILL service to the
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry is provided through the Science Library, 1031
Natural Products Center.  Phone (662) 915-5668; Fax: (662) 915-7549.

Submitting Requests
Requests are accepted only online via ILLiad (see ESSENTIAL ILLIAD INFORMATION).
Current copyright law prohibits the Library from ordering more than 5 articles dated within the
past 5 years from any one particular journal title during any one given year, unless copyright fees
are paid to the publisher. For this reason, borrowers may be asked to limit requests for current
articles.

Time
Requests submitted to Interlibrary Loans are usually sent to the prospective lending library
within 24 hours. Generally, at least 2 weeks should be allowed for receipt of materials, although
most items arrive much more quickly. 

Borrowers receive notification by email when items have arrived. The status of requests may
also be determined by logging into ILLiad and clicking “View Requests.”

Charges
There is no charge to UM Faculty, staff, or eligible students for normal ILL service in support of
their scholarly or University-related research. 

Limitations on Loans
The conditions of ILL services are set by national and regional codes as well as by the policies
of each lending library. The following types of materials ordinarily cannot be requested for loan:

-Material not related to scholarly research or instructional programs
-Textbooks
-Items on Reserve or in Special Collections in the UM Library



2

-Whole issues of serials
-Rare material
-Genealogical, heraldic and similar material
-Newspapers and manuscripts, unless available in microform

Exceptions to this list are occasionally made. Therefore, consult the ILL office about any
research material not owned by the library.

No limit has been set on the number of items a patron may borrow. However, borrowers are
reminded not to order more than they will be able to use during the allowed loan period. The ILL
workload is extremely heavy during the months of October and March. For best service, please
submit requests as early in the semester as possible.

Loan Periods
The lending library determines the length of the loan period for books, which is usually between
one and four weeks.

Renewals should be requested only in unusual circumstances, and should be requested BEFORE
the due date. Many libraries do not allow any renewals, so patrons are urged to plan their
research to complete the use of ILL material before the due dates.

Book Returns and Overdues
Materials borrowed should be returned to the Interlibrary Loans Department during regular
office hours. With prior arrangement, pick-up and return may be made after hours at the
Circulation Desk.

Prompt returns enable us to remain in good standing with the lending institutions.

Delinquencies could result in discontinuation of service or submission of your name to the
Registrar, which will result in a hold being placed on your records.


	Page 1
	Page 2

