
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Political Activities and Public Office 
 

Summary/Purpose:  This is a list of procedures and guidelines established to implement the 
statement set forth by the Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning concerning 
political activities of employees. 
 
The Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning has promulgated the following 
policy statement concerning political activities of employees: 
 

 Participation by employees of the several institutions of higher learning in various 
community and public affairs is expected; however, it is expected that time given to such 
activities will not interfere with the regular duties of the employees.  Political activities by 
an employee will not be prohibited at such times as the employee would not be ordinarily 
required to render services to the institution or if the employee elects to take and the 
institution grants leave of absence without pay. 

 
The following procedures and guidelines are established to implement this policy on the Oxford 
campus of The University of Mississippi:  
 

1.  Before an employee shall become a candidate for public office, he or she must give        
notice of candidacy to the appropriate department chairperson, dean or director, vice 
chancellor, and Chancellor. 

 
 2.  Such employee must not permit his or her candidacy to interfere with the discharge of    

  normal responsibilities to the University. 
 

                        3.  The employee must take Personal Leave or leave without pay status for any portion of              
the normal working day that he or she expends on political activities. 

 
 4.  The employee must not state nor imply that his or her candidacy has the endorsement       

    of the University. 
 

                        5.  The employee must not use the insignia, seal, or logos of the University on any                 
campaign literature, television ads, banners, or other campaign devices. 

 
 6.  The employee must not use the University telephone system, mail service, equipment,   
      supplies or physical facilities in organizing or conducting his or her campaign. 
 
 7.  No teacher shall use any part of a scheduled class period to promote his or her    
      candidacy. 
 
 8.  If the employee is a successful candidate for a full-time public office, such employee  
      must resign his or her full-time University employment before assuming the duties of      
      the office to which he or she is elected. 


