
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 5 
 

Credits and Grades 

The Semester Hour • A semester hour is a unit of credit earned for academic work that includes no less 

than one hour of classroom or direct faculty instruction AND a minimum of two hours of out-of-class 

student work for approximately fifteen weeks for one semester (or the equivalent amount of work over a 

different amount of time);  OR a semester hour is a unit of credit earned for an equivalent amount of 

work, as required above, for other academic activities as established by the institution, including 

laboratory work, internships, practica, studio work, and other academic work leading to the award of 

credit hours.  A typical three-hour course requires a minimum of 2250 contact minutes each semester.  

For courses taught in an online and/or asynchronous format, the amount of instruction and student work 

must be equivalent to that for a traditional course.   

 

Class Attendance  ●  The philosophy of the institution is that students who attend class learn more than 

those who do not attend regularly and that grades are a reflection of learning.  Furthermore, the policy 

below affirms that faculty and students share important responsibilities for the quality of the overall in-

class learning experience. 

 Responsibility of instructors: It is the responsibility of the instructor to determine the attendance 

guidelines that best promote learning in a particular course.  On or before the first meeting of each class, 

the instructor is expected to articulate and inform students in writing via a course syllabus about specific 

class attendance requirements. Procedural information and best practices for constructing course 

attendance policies are given in the Guidelines for Class Attendance, which is posted on the institution’s 

policy directory.  In general, instructors should exercise fair and consistent standards in determining when 

to excuse an absence and/or when to provide accommodations for missed major exams and assessments.   

An excused absence or accommodation must be provided to students who miss class to observe a 

recognized religious day or to fulfill a civic responsibility (e.g., jury duty or military service). 

 Responsibility of students: It is the responsibility of the student to comply with the class 

attendance guidelines/policies and complete assignments, including those that involve out-of-class or 

online participation.  Students are responsible for informing instructors in advance about anticipated 

absences.  Students should recognize that individual sections of a course may be taught differently and 

that the attendance policy for individual sections of a course may not be the same. 

Aside from the learning opportunities missed due to absences from class, there are cases when a class 

absence or multiple absences may result in a student being dropped from a course or dismissed from the 

University.  Specifically,  

1. Students must attend the first meeting of every course for which they are registered, unless they 
obtain prior departmental approval. Without such approval, a student who is absent from the first 

class meeting may be dropped from that class by the dean of the school or college with the 

responsibility for the course.  

2. A student who incurs excessive absences in a given course may receive a grade of F for the 
course, and, in addition, may be dismissed from the class upon recommendation of the instructor 

and approval by the student’s academic dean. When it appears to an instructor that a student has 

discontinued a class without officially dropping the course, the instructor will report this fact to 

the student’s academic dean. The university reserves the right to dismiss from the university any 

student who has been excessively absent from multiple courses. 

 

Faculty and staff who supervise student organizations and teams, including NCAA sports teams, are 

expected to schedule competitions and performances in such a way as to minimize the number of classes 

that students will miss. Names of participating students and the dates of class conflicts should be provided 

to the students’ instructors prior to participation.  Students and instructors should attempt to resolve 

potential conflicts regarding class attendance before the semester course withdrawal deadline.  In cases 

where absence from class results from travel delays or the unanticipated continuation of participation in a 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 5 
 

competition, the student or supervisor should inform the instructor within one business day so that 

reasonable accommodations for absences due to university-sponsored activities can be made.  

If a student informs an instructor in advance about an anticipated absence and the instructor decides not to 

provide an accommodation for a major exam or assessment, the student may appeal to the department 

chair or program director (or dean, when the instructor is chair or program director) who oversees the 

course.  An appeal must be based on (a) failure of the instructor to articulate a policy, (b) failure of the 

instructor to follow the articulated policy, or (c) failure by the instructor to offer a reasonable 

accommodation for a documented absence that caused a student to miss an assessment that is worth 20% 

or more of the course grade.   

 

Pass-Fail Grading for Exercise and Leisure Activity Courses • The pass-fail basis is the only grading 

available for all one-hour (EL) exercise and leisure activity courses. 

 

Grade Symbols • A final grade is the instructor’s evaluation of a student’s achievement throughout a 

semester’s work in a course. Factors upon which the final grade may be based include attendance, 

recitation, written and oral quizzes and tests, reports, papers, the final examination, and other class 

activities. The evaluation is expressed according to the following letter ABCDF letter system, with + and 

– adjustments possible for certain letter grades. 

         

Passing Grades Failing Grades Other Marks 

A 
Excellent 

F  Failure I  Incomplete 

A- IP In Progress 

B+ 

Good 

W  Withdrawn 

B X  Audit 

B-  

C+ 

Satisfactory C 

C- 

D Lowest passing grade 

P Pass 

Z Credit granted 

 

Grade Points and GPA • The grade-point average (GPA) is computed by dividing the number of A, B+, 

B, B-, C+, C, C-, D, F-graded hours attempted at The University of Mississippi into the total number of 

grade points earned at the university. Grade points per credit hour are assigned as follows: A = 4.0; A- = 

3.7; B+ = 3.3; B = 3.0; B- = 2.7; C+ = 2.3; C = 2.0; C- = 1.7; D = 1.0; F = 0.  For the purpose of certain 

prerequisites and degree requirements, a B average and C average are defined as a GPA of 3.00 and 2.00, 

respectively, unless a more specific requirement is indicated.  Independent study courses are not included 

in the semester-based GPA calculation. 

 

F Grade • The grade of F is recorded if the student has failed on the combined evaluation of work 

through the semester, or if the student officially withdraws from the course after the course withdrawal 

deadline and was failing the course at the time of withdrawal. 

 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 3 of 5 
 

P Grade • The grade of P is recorded for a student who earns a passing grade after enrolling in an 

exercise and leisure activity course on a pass-fail basis. P grades are not used in computing the student’s 

GPA. F grades recorded for pass-fail course work are, however, computed in the GPA as F grades. The P 

grade is not used in determining whether a student qualifies to graduate with academic honors. 

 

Z Grade • The Z grade is given to a student who earns a passing grade in certain courses for which the 

traditional grades of A, B, C, and D are deemed inappropriate. Courses for which the Z grade is 

authorized are denoted in the catalog listings; ABCD grades are not awarded in these courses. The Z 

grade is also given for advanced placement credit, for credit by examination as in the College Level 

Examination Program, for credit earned in some Study Abroad courses, for credit based on Armed Forces 

experiences, and for credit earned in a course for which a student has appropriately exercised the “Z grade 

option” described below. 

 

Z grades are not used in computing a student’s GPA; F grades recorded for Z-graded course work are, 

however, computed in the GPA as F grades. The Z grade is not used in determining whether a student 

qualifies to graduate with academic honors. 

 

I Mark • The temporary mark of I (incomplete) is given to a student when, for unusual reasons 

acceptable to the instructor, course requirements cannot be completed before the end of the semester. The 

instructor will submit an I Mark Assignment Form online during final grade submission, which will detail 

the work to be completed and the deadline for completion. This information will be conveyed to the 

student via email. COURSE FAILURE OR UNEXPLAINED CLASS ABSENCES MAY NOT BE 

USED AS REASONS TO ASSIGN AN I MARK. I marks are not computed in determining a student’s 

GPA. If an I mark for an undergraduate student has not been changed to a regular grade before the course 

withdrawal deadline (the 30th day of classes) of the next regular semester (excluding summer terms), the 

I automatically changes to an F and is computed in the GPA. AN I MARK MAY NOT BE REMOVED 

BY FORMALLY ENROLLING IN THE SAME COURSE IN A SUBSEQUENT SEMESTER AT THIS 

UNIVERSITY OR ANY OTHER INSTITUTION. 

 

IP Mark • The mark of IP (in progress) may be assigned to the first course in specifically designated 

course sequences whose nature is such that a regular grade would not be appropriate until the conclusion 

of the second course. Although a student’s course load reflects registration for the first course, both credit 

hours and grade points for the work done in both courses are assigned only upon completion of the 

second course. The IP mark is permanent, but is not used in computing the student’s GPA. Course 

sequences for which the IP mark is authorized are denoted in the catalog listings. 

 

W Mark • The W mark is recorded if the student obtains authorization to withdraw from a course after 

the course withdrawal deadline and was not failing the course at the time of withdrawal. The W mark is 

not computed in determining the GPA. 

 

The Z Grade Option • A current undergraduate student who is classified as a junior or senior may elect 

to take one course for credit toward the student’s undergraduate degree that would ordinarily be graded on 

an A, B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-, D, or F basis but for which the student will receive either a Z or an F grade. 

Upon making this election, the student will receive a Z grade for the course if the student earns the 

equivalent of a C or higher in the course; otherwise, the student will receive an F grade. To make this Z 

grade election as to a particular course, the student must obtain the approval of the student’s dean. The 

election may not be made as to the following courses: (1) a course that a student will use to satisfy 

university core curriculum requirements; (2) a course that a student will use to satisfy the required 

curriculum component of any major or minor course of study or any degree (that is, the courses 

specifically identified as required or the minimum semester hours in particular subjects or in a department 

indicated as required); and (3) a course that a student will use to satisfy any requirement of a major or 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 4 of 5 
 

minor course of study or degree that a minimum number of hours be taken in courses of a particular level 

or higher (e.g., 300 level or higher). If a student elects to take a course on a Z grade basis but then 

subsequently changes degree plans such that the course becomes one to which one of the foregoing 

exclusions apply, then the student must retake and receive credit for the course on an A, B+, B, B-, C+, C, 

C-, D, or F basis. A student who elects to take a course for a Z grade under this policy may rescind this 

election up through the last day for registering or adding classes, but not thereafter. Conversely, a student 

who registers to take a class offered on an A, B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-, D, or F basis but would be entitled to 

elect to take the class on a Z grade basis according to this policy may make this election up through the 

last day for registering or adding classes, but not thereafter. 

 

X Mark • The mark of X is recorded for the student who enrolls as an auditor in a course and who fulfills 

all requirements established by the instructor for auditing students. If the student does not meet the 

requirements, no recording of the course is made to the student’s permanent record. The deadline for 

changing one’s status in a course to or from “audit” is the course withdrawal deadline. 

 

Change of Grade • A course instructor may change a reported grade only if the original grade was 

incorrectly assigned due to clerical or computational error, or if a student meets the requirements for the 

removal of an I mark. 

 

Repeating a Course ! With the exception of courses that are specifically indicated to be repeatable for 

credit, students may repeat courses taken at the university according to the following requirements: 

 the first or prior courses must have been completed with a grade of B-, C+, C, C-, D, F, Z or 
P;  

 a course with an Incomplete grade cannot be repeated; 

 a lower division course may be repeated twice (e.g., three attempts) and an upper division or 
graduate course may be repeated once; exceptions to these numbers of attempts must be 

approved by the student’s academic advisor, the chair and dean controlling the course; 

 letter grades for all attempts will appear on the student’s permanent academic record and 
will be calculated into the student’s cumulative GPA (unless the Forgiveness Policy is 

invoked for the course); 

 credit toward a degree will be granted only once;  

 if a student passes a course at the university and then fails the course on a repeated attempt, 
the passing attempt will apply to degree requirements;  

 

 Individual schools may establish more restrictive requirements for their majors. 

 

The Forgiveness Policy - An undergraduate student may improve his or her overall GPA by invoking 

forgiveness or exclusion on a maximum of four courses (not to exceed 14 credit hours) in which the 

student received a grade of C-, D or F and requesting that the original grade be excluded from the GPA 

calculation. If the course has been repeated, the repeat must be in the same course and must be taken at 

The University of Mississippi in fall 1992 or later. Under the forgiveness policy, a maximum of two 

courses (not to exceed 7 hours) in which the student received a grade of C-, D or F may be excluded from 

the student’s GPA calculation without repeating the course. The student must file a Petition to Invoke 

Grade Forgiveness Policy with the registrar, stating which courses are to be forgiven or excluded. Once 

the student has declared one or more courses, different courses cannot be substituted at a later date. The 

forgiveness policy cannot be used to remove grades given for reasons of academic discipline. Forgiveness 

of a course grade will not change notations concerning academic standing or honors in the student=s 

official record for the semester containing the forgiven course.  



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 5 of 5 
 

 

Although original grades will remain on the student’s permanent record, the forgiven or excluded grades 

will not be used to determine credit towards a degree and GPA. The original course will be recorded with 

both the grade earned and the symbol R to denote that it has been removed from the student’s GPA 

calculation either because it was repeated or excluded. The recalculated GPA will be used for determining 

graduation honors.  

 

The forgiveness policy does not apply to students enrolled in the professional program in the School of 

Pharmacy for grades received in required professional courses as designated in the curricula for the B.S. 

in Pharmaceutical Sciences and Doctor of Pharmacy degree. 

 

 

 


