
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Medical Waste Disposal 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Medical Waste Disposal Policy details the minimum requirements and 
procedures to dispose of Medical Waste. 
 

Disposal Information and Procedures 

Medical Waste Disposal 

How do I get this Medical Waste removed?  

DISPOSAL OF MEDICAL WASTE 

Laboratory Services (LS) is responsible for compliance with and enforcement of the Federal and 
State laws and regulations that apply to the use and disposal of biologically hazardous materials. 
Specific regulations and policies are located in the Biological Safety Manual 
 

Medical Waste disposal requires the services of an outside contractor and the segregation of 
waste materials at the departmental level.  

How to Package Medical Waste for Disposal: 

 Medical Waste must be packaged in the containers provided by Health & Safety.  
 All containers will be provided with a liner. Medical Waste must be placed in the 

provided liners. Containers may be filled up to a maximum weight of 55 pounds (25 Kg) 
 Sharp Materials (Sharps - needles, broken glass, and other contaminated materials that 

could potentially pierce the inner liner) must be placed in puncture resistant containers. 
 Animals must be frozen and packed for shipment on the day the shipment is scheduled to 

be picked up.  
 Each liner must be twisted and tied with an overhand knot to prevent any liquid leaks and 

to meet shipping requirements. 
 The container must be securely closed. 
 Labels on the container must not be defaced, covered or removed. 
 A Request for Biomedical Waste Disposal, Form DHS-71must be submitted with the 

waste.  
 When you have full container, call LS 5433. You will be put on the pick-up schedule. 

Chemotherapeutic Waste and Animal Wastes must be segregated for our disposal contractor. 
Be sure your forms clearly indicate Animal or Chemotherapeutic Wastes so we may label the 
containers properly prior to removal for disposal. 

Medical Waste and Pathological Waste follow the same disposal procedures. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

Autoclaved Waste requiring disposal as a medical waste will be collected like any other non-
animal medical waste materials.  

No materials stored in a Biohazardous Bag (red or orange) may be disposed of into the 
ordinary or laboratory trash.  

Autoclavable material must be rendered inactive by sterilization, or other acceptable 
methods, under the supervision of the principal investigator.  

 
Required sterilization and disposal methods: 

Animal Carcasses; 

Freeze prior to removal & package as Biomedical Waste for Incineration offsite. 

Autoclavable Materials: 

Materials requiring processing after autoclaving - package as Biomedical Waste for 
Incineration offsite.  

Educational (Classroom) Materials that can be rendered harmless by autoclaving - 
Autoclave Sterilization, remove Biohazard Markings, disposal in ordinary trash. 

Research Materials, even if they may be rendered harmless by autoclaving - Autoclave 
Sterilization, package as Biomedical Waste for Incineration offsite 

Sharps, glass, etc.: 

All Sharps - Package as Medical Waste for Incineration offsite. 

Liquids: 

Autoclave Sterilization followed by Drain Disposal 

Solids and Sludge produced during Liquid Autoclaving - Package as Medical Waste for 
Incineration offsite 


