
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

International Student Employment 
 

Summary/Purpose: Information related to the employment of international students  
 
 
All non-U.S. citizens enrolled in courses at the University of Mississippi are considered to be 
international students by the university.  Restrictions to the ability to work, number of hours and location 
of employment apply to all international students with the exception of those holding U.S. permanent 
resident status due to federal regulations.  Additionally, international students are instructed to refer to the 
“Employment of Students” policy which gives hourly limits and other requirements for all university 
student employees. 
 

• F-1 status holders are able to have 20 hours per week of on-campus employment while school 
is in session. F-1 students may work more than 20 hours per week (subject to general 
university student employee rules) during school breaks lasting a full week when the student 
is not enrolled. Work associated with an assistantship counts toward the 20 hour limit and 
will be calculated as described on the graduate assistantship appointment.   

• J-1 status holders must have written permission from the Office of International Programs as 
well as the Exchange Visitor Program sponsor. A form to request J-1 student employment 
permission is available from the Office of International Programs and must be completed and 
approved prior to beginning employment. Permission for up to 20 hours per week of on-
campus employment while school is in session and additional hours during school breaks is 
possible.  

• J-2 status holders and H-4 status holders meeting the USCIS eligibility requirements for work 
authorization must apply for and receive employment permission from the U.S. Citizenship 
and Immigration Service (USCIS) prior to commencing employment. Employment is limited 
to the dates granted by USCIS.   

• Federal law prohibits employment for those holding F-2 classification. 

 
 


