
1 
 

The University of Mississippi  

UNIVERSITY PETTY CASH POLICY  
  

Summary/Purpose:  Petty cash funds and corresponding records are subject to examination by 
university and external auditors. Audit of these funds is to ensure that cash and receipts on hand 
equal the amount recorded in the university general ledger. Any shortages are the responsibility 
of the fund custodian who shall be responsible for reimbursement to the University. If loss or 
theft of petty cash occurs, the custodian must provide a signed written explanation approved by 
his/her supervisor to notify Internal Audit and University Police and Campus Safety as soon as 
the loss is detected.   
  
Personal business, such as cashing checks, should not be transacted with petty cash funds.   
Additionally, IOUs or “borrowing” petty cash funds for personal use is implicitly disallowed.  

To establish a petty cash fund, the departmental Director/Dean must submit a written request to 
the Office of Accounting detailing the desired amount, purpose and proposed custodian of the 
fund. The request will be reviewed and, if approved, Accounting will create the fund (general 
ledger account number) and send a confirmation letter to the fund custodian with courtesy 
copies to the custodian's supervisor and Internal Audit. The Office of Accounting will complete 
a Request for Payment form with “Custodian’s Name Petty Cash” listed as the payee, attach a 
copy of the confirmation letter and submit to Procurement Services. Procurement Services will 
issue payment to the custodian to provide the initial petty cash funds. 
 
To increase a petty cash fund, the custodian must submit a written request approved by the 
custodian’s supervisor to the Office of Accounting detailing the amount requested and 
explanation. The request will be reviewed, and notification of the decision will be forwarded to 
the custodian with courtesy copies to the custodian’s supervisor and Internal Audit.  The Office 
of Accounting will complete a Request for Payment form with “Custodian’s Name Petty Cash” 
listed as the payee, attach a copy of the confirmation letter and submit to Procurement Services. 
Procurement Services will issue payment to the custodian to provide the increase in petty cash 
funds. 
 
To reduce or close a petty cash fund, the custodian must check with the Office of Accounting to 
determine the correct account number in which to deposit funds. The custodian then must 
deposit the desired amount at the Office of the Bursar into the petty cash general ledger fund 
(10-xxxxx). A copy of the deposit receipt must be forwarded to the Office of Accounting.  
Accounting will verify the zero balance for the petty cash fund in SAP and send a notification 
letter to the custodian with courtesy copies to the custodian’s supervisor and Internal Audit.  

To change the custodian of a petty cash fund, the current custodian must notify the Office of 
Accounting of the intended change. Both the relinquishing custodian and accepting custodian 
must be present at the time of transfer, perform a count of the funds, and sign the change of 
custodian form. The change form should then be signed by the custodian’s supervisor and 
forwarded to the Office of Accounting so that necessary changes can be made to the university 
records. Accounting will send a confirmation letter to the accepting custodian detailing the 
custodian’s responsibilities with courtesy copies to the custodian’s supervisor and Internal 



2 
 

Audit. Anytime a petty cash custodian terminates employment with the University, a 
custodian change form must be completed and approved by the custodian’s supervisor to 
either change the custodian or close the account. This must be done prior to the employee 
leaving the University.   

To reimburse a petty cash fund, the custodian must complete a Request for Payment form with  
“Custodian’s Name Petty Cash” listed as the payee, attach receipts and submit to Procurement 
Services. Procurement Services will review the receipts and, if approved, will issue a check 
made payable to “Custodian’s Name Petty Cash.” This check must be cashed, and the petty cash 
fund replenished.   

Petty cash funds should be kept in a secure location with the number of individuals with access 
appropriately limited. Petty cash funds should be routinely reconciled by the fund custodian on 
at least a monthly basis. The total amount on hand plus unreimbursed receipts should always 
equal the general ledger total for the fund. Reconciliation records should be retained for at least 
7 years and be available for review by auditors.   Petty cash audits will periodically be 
performed to ensure that the cash and receipts on hand equal the amount stated in the GL 
account in SAP.  

Forms can be obtained from the Office of Accounting website http://accounting.olemiss.edu/.  

    

  

  
   


