
Page 1 of 2 
 

The University of Mississippi 

 

Admission of Transfer Students 
 

ADMISSION OF TRANSFER STUDENTS 

Students may be accepted for transfer from other regionally accredited colleges and universities if 
they have earned an associate’s degree intended for transfer to a four-year school. In addition, 
students may be accepted from other regionally accredited colleges and universities if a minimum 
2.00 cumulative GPA has been maintained on all course work attempted with the exception of 
vocational/technical or other courses not acceptable for transfer. Every attempt on repeated 
courses is counted. Applicants must list all colleges attended on the application for admission. 
(Failure to provide information about prior college attendance is grounds for disciplinary action 
including immediate dismissal from the university.) 
 
In addition, the applicant must meet one of the following criteria: 

1. Has been admissible as a freshman. The applicant must submit official high school records 
(see Freshman Admission) as well as college transcripts to meet this requirement. 
2. Has successfully completed at least the following 30 semester hours of college work at a 
regionally accredited school: 

  6 hours of English composition 
3 hours of college algebra or quantitative reasoning or statistics (taken from a department 
of mathematics) or a more advanced mathematics course 

 6 hours of laboratory science 
 6 hours of social or behavioral science 
 9 hours of fine art and humanities 

 
Additional criteria for the admission of transfer students is given at Web site 
www.olemiss.edu/admissions/applying.html or can be obtained by calling (662) 915-7226. 
 
Evaluation of Credits • University policy on the transfer of credit hours is described in the 
Academic Regulations chapter under Transfer Credit. 
 
Grade Requirements • Transfer students are required to maintain a minimum GPA of 2.0 on 
courses taken at the university, and to have a minimum GPA of 2.0 on all college work attempted, 
in order to graduate. See Degree Requirements in the Academic Regulations chapter. 
 
Students may be accepted for transfer from other regionally accredited colleges and universities if 
a minimum 2.00 cumulative GPA has been maintained on all course work attempted with the 
exception of vocational/technical or other courses not acceptable for transfer. Every attempt on 
repeated courses is counted. Applicants must list all colleges attended on the application for 
admission. ( Failure to provide information about prior college attendance is grounds for 
disciplinary action including immediate dismissal from the University.) 
 
In addition, the applicant must meet one of the following criteria: 
 



Page 2 of 2 
 

1.   Has been admissible as a freshman. The applicant must submit official high school records 
(see Freshman Admission) as well as college transcripts to meet this requirement. 
2.   Has successfully completed at least the following 24 semester hours of college work at a 
regionally accredited school: 

6 hours of English composition 
3 hours of college algebra or higher 
6 hours of laboratory science 
9 hours of transferable electives 

3.  Has earned an associate=s degree intended for transfer to a four-year school. 
 
A student who does not meet the 2.00 transfer GPA requirement and has not attended college in at 
least 12 months may be considered for admission on probation. The student must submit a letter of 
petition with the application and be approved by the academic dean of the college or school that 
the student wishes to enter. Students who have been out of school for at least 36 months may be 
admitted without petition as undergraduates. Such students must earn at least a 2.0 on the first 12 
hours and thereafter. 
 
Evaluation of Credits ! University policy on the transfer of credit hours is described in the 
Academic Regulations chapter under Transfer Credit. 
 
Grade Requirements ! Transfer students are required to maintain a minimum GPA of 2.0 on 
courses taken at the University, and to have a minimum GPA of 2.0 on all college work attempted, 
in order to graduate. See Degree Requirements in the Academic Regulations chapter. 
 
 


