
Page 1 of  2

The University of Mississippi

OTHER TYPES OF ADMISSION

Admission of Visiting Students ! A student who regularly attends another recognized
institution and who plans to return to that institution may be admitted to the University as a
visiting student. The applicant must comply with the general requirements for admission and, in
lieu of transcripts of credits, must submit a letter or certificate of good standing from an official of
the institution that the student regularly attends. A student admitted to the summer session as a
visiting student may elect to enroll in the University’s next regular session. The student can
qualify by submitting transcripts of credits from the other institutions attended and by meeting the
requirements applicable to transfer students. If the student has attended The University of
Mississippi previously, he or she must be re-admissible.

Admission of Students Who Are Not Graduates of Regionally Accredited High Schools !
Applicants who are home-schooled or who have not successfully completed high school must
submit standard test scores (ACT composite minimum of 18 or SAT combined minimum of 860)
and successfully complete the Mississippi College Placement Exam (see “Other Admission
Criteria” above). Home-schooled students must present summaries of their educational
experiences, which may include portfolios and transcripts. Students who are not high school
graduates must present qualifying GED scores or, in some cases, may qualify as undergraduate
special students (see below).

Admission of Undergraduate Special Students ! A student who is at least 21 years of age, has
been out of school for at least three years, and cannot present an acceptable high school record
may be admitted to the University for such courses as he or she may be prepared to enter. This
category is reserved for those who have had delays or interruption of the traditional sequence of
educational pursuits. A person admitted as a special student is admitted with the same retention
standards as degree-seeking students. Special students must have a minimum of a 2.0 GPA on 12
hours of course work to become degree-seeking students. After meeting this requirement, the
special student may become a regularly enrolled student and the work completed while in the
special status may be applied toward a degree. Failure to meet the stated requirements will result
in academic suspension. While in special student status, a student may not register for more than
12 hours in a semester or summer session and will not qualify for financial aid programs.

Admission of Unclassified Students ! Applicants who have already received the baccalaureate
degree may enroll in the University if they desire to take courses for personal or professional
improvement at the 400 level or below; or are pursuing a second undergraduate degree.
Generally, students pursuing a second undergraduate degree will not be permitted to take
graduate courses, but under certain circumstances, with the approval of the appropriate academic
dean, they may enroll as unclassified students in 500-level courses.

Admission of Graduate Students ! An applicant who has completed all requirements or has
received the bachelor’s degree from an institution accredited by a regional or recognized
professional accrediting association may be admitted to the University as a graduate student for a



Page 2 of  2

program leading to an advanced degree, or as a graduate student with nondegree status for
enrollment in graduate course work. Applicants desiring to enroll in the Graduate School should
consult the Graduate School catalog for admission requirements and procedures.

Admission to the University of Mississippi Medical Center (Jackson campus) ! After
completion of the undergraduate prerequisites, applications for enrollment in medicine, nursing,
dentistry, and health-related professions are submitted to the Division of Student Services and
Records, The University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 N. State Street, Jackson, Mississippi
39216. Students should consult the Medical School catalog for admission requirements and
procedures. Pre-nursing students also may have the option of seeking admission through the Early
Entry Nursing Program. See the health professions sections of this catalog for details.


	Page 1
	Page 2

