
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 32 

Chemical Safety Manual 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Chemical Safety Manual details the minimum requirements and 
procedures for operations involving Chemicals and Hazardous materials.  
 
 

University of Mississippi - Chemical Safety Manual 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBERS  

HEALTH AND SAFETY POLICY  

DEFINITION OF ABBREVIATIONS 

1. INTRODUCTION  

2. LAWS AND REGULATIONS 

3. UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SAFETY  
3.1 RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITY  
3.2 ORGANIZATION  

4. RIGHT TO KNOW  
4.1 RIGHTS  
4.2 SERVICES TO PROTECT RIGHTS  

5. CHEMICAL SAFETY  
5.1 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS  
5.2 HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS  
5.3 PROCUREMENT OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS  
5.4 RESTRICTED MATERIALS 
5.5 CHEMICAL SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE  
5.6 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS  
5.7 SPECIAL STORAGE REQUIREMENTS  
5.8 DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS  
5.9 LABORATORY CLOSE-OUT PROCEDURE  

6. CHEMICAL SPILLS  
6.1 GENERAL PROCEDURES  
6.2 CHEMICALS SPILLED ON THE BODY OVER A LARGE AREA  
6.3 CHEMICALS ON THE SKIN 
6.4 CORROSIVE CHEMICALS  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 32 

6.5 BROMINE ON THE SKIN  
6.6 HYDROGEN FLUORIDE ON THE BODY OR IN THE AIR  

7. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES  
7.1 WHEN AN EMERGENCY OCCURS  
7.2 DO WHAT IS NECESSARY TO PROTECT LIFE WHILE WAITING FOR 
ASSISTANCE. KEEP CALM  

APPENDIX  

 

EMERGENCY TELEPHONE NUMBERS 
 
FIRE 

 
 
 
9-911 

UNIVERSITY POLICE 7234 
STUDENT HEALTH SERVICES 7275 
BAPTIST HOSPITAL NORTH MISSISSIPPI 9-232-8100
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SAFETY 5433 

 
IN THE EVENT OF AN ACCIDENT, SPILL, FIRE, EXPLOSION 

OR OTHER EMERGENCY INVOLVING CHEMICALS 

CALL 

THE HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE TEAM 

DURING NORMAL WORKING HOURS (915)-5433 

NIGHTS AND WEEKENDS (915)-7234 

 
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY POLICY; 

As a responsible institution of higher education, this University's laboratories, offices and other 
facilities shall be maintained as clean and healthful places of employment. Every effort shall be 
made to design and operate all University facilities in compliance with the spirit and letter of 
federal, state and local occupational health and safety regulations. 

The University acknowledges and shall endeavor to satisfy its responsibility to promptly provide 
current, comprehensive information on potential adverse health effects and appropriate handling 
procedures for all hazardous materials handled by both our employees and our students. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 32 

It is a basic responsibility of all University employees and students to make the health and safety 
of fellow human beings a part of their daily concern. This responsibility must be accepted by 
each one who conducts the affairs of the University, no matter in what capacity he/she may 
function. 

In order to implement this policy, the rules and regulations given in this manual shall be 
complied with by all University personnel. Assistance with specific health and safety problems 
may be obtained from the University Department of Health and Safety. 

 

 
 

DEFINITION OF ABBREVIATIONS; 
DEFINITION OF ABBREVIATIONS 

ACGIH    American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
ANSI    American National Standards Institute 
ATF     Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Regulations 
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations. 
DHS    University Department of Health and Safety. 
DOT    U.S. Department of Transportation. 
EPA    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
LD 50    Lethal Dose for 50% of those exposed. 
MHWM    Mississippi Hazardous Waste Management Regulations. 
MSDS    Material Safety Data Sheet. 

. 

 
 

1. INTRODUCTION; 

This manual contains regulations and procedures specific to the use of hazardous materials at the 
Oxford Campus and Lafayette county properties of The University of Mississippi, hereafter 
referred to as the Oxford campus. It is not intended to be exhaustive, and individual laboratories 
may have specific safety concerns or problems which are not covered. This manual should be 
considered a minimum requirement for a laboratory safety program. In general, specific federal 
and state regulations are not restated. However, all such regulations are assumed to be applicable 
and binding on personnel working with or using hazardous chemical materials at this University. 
Every laboratory worker is required to read this manual and to complete the chemical safety 
training program prior to beginning any work with chemicals. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 32 

These regulations and procedures apply to and are binding on all persons who receive, possess, 
use or dispose of hazardous chemical materials on the Oxford Campus of The University of 
Mississippi. 

Safe work practices are expected of all personnel and students at The University of Mississippi. 
The procedures and policies in this manual have proven effective over the past several years 
when followed. All employees and students are responsible for following safety policies in their 
work areas, and insuring that these regulations are followed by others. It is not the intent of these 
regulations to affect either the quality, the quantity or the freedoms normally associated with 
research or with teaching. Nor is it the intent of these regulations to be rigid or inflexible. Certain 
endeavors may require that exemptions to the regulations be made in order to foster scientific 
undertakings. The University is willing to hear specific concerns as they arise and to assist 
personnel involved with these chemical operations in tailoring procedures that will meet the 
spirit of these regulations while adequately protecting personnel, the University and the 
environment from unnecessary hazards. 

Personnel are expected to bring safety concerns to the attention of their supervisors or their 
departmental safety committee. If additional assistance is needed with a problem, contact the 
Department of Health and Safety (DHS). The situation will be investigated and appropriate 
action recommended where required. 

Information is available from the DHS on the development of specific safety programs for 
hazardous operations not covered in this manual. Additional information on topics in this manual 
is also available from the DHS. Slide and video cassette programs covering a variety of specific 
safety topics are also available from the Department of Health and Safety. 
The University is committed to working towards providing a safe work environment free from 
recognized hazards. If everyone cooperates, significant progress can be made in this area, and 
The University of Mississippi can become a safer place in which to work.  

2. LAWS AND REGULATIONS; 

STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS; 
Some of the state and federal regulations (it should be noted that federal and state regulations are 
continually being modified and updated) and guidelines applicable to The University of 
Mississippi in the area of Chemical Safety are the following: 

A. "The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act", Public Law 94-580, October 21, 1976. As 
amended by the "Quiet Communities Act" of 1978; "Solid Waste Disposal Act" of 1980; 
"Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act" of 1980, and "The 
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986". 

B. "Environmental Protection Agency", Code of Federal Regulations, 40, Parts 100 to 149, and 
49, Parts 190 to 399, current revision. 

C. "Department of Transportation", Code of Federal Regulations, 49, Parts 100 to 177, current 
revision. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 32 

D. Mississippi Hazardous Waste Management Regulations, Mississippi State Board of Health, 
current revisions and amendments. 

3 UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SAFETY; 

3.1 RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITY; 

The Department of Health and Safety will be responsible to the Chancellor of the University for 
compliance with and enforcement of the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
regulations; the U. S. Department of Transportation (DOT) regulations; and the Mississippi 
Hazardous Waste Management (MHWM) regulations on the Oxford campus of The University 
of Mississippi. Specific responsibilities and authority are delineated under the items listed below. 

A. Chemical Responsibilities: 

1. Responsible for control and disposal of all hazardous chemical substances. 
2. Authority to inspect all areas of the campus for violations of federal and state laws governing 
the safe use and disposal of all hazardous chemical materials. 
3. Authority to implement controls for the use and disposal of all hazardous chemical materials. 
4. Responsible for providing safety information concerning hazardous chemical materials to all 
University personnel. 
5. Responsible for providing the required chemical safety training. 

B. Enforcement Authority: 
1. The University Department of Health and Safety will have the authority to enforce compliance 
with the regulations referenced in section 2.1, and other applicable safety regulations for all 
segments of the Oxford campus. 
2. In the event of major noncompliance, action will be taken only after consultation with the 
Chancellor's office, unless there is an immediate danger to the health of personnel or an 
immediate danger to University property. 
3. Remedial actions required by this office may be appealed to the Chancellor for a final 
decision. 
4. The Chancellor of the University will have final authority and responsibility in these areas. 

C. Emergency Authority: 

In the event of an emergency, the Health and Safety Officer of the Department of Health and 
Safety and in his absence the Chemical Safety Coordinator have the authority to commit any and 
all University Resources necessary to carry out the University Contingency Plan. 

D. Exceptions to Regulations: 

The Health and Safety Officer of the Department of Health and Safety is the only person 
delegated by the Chancellor to make exceptions to the regulations and procedures given in this 
manual. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 6 of 32 

3.2 ORGANIZATION;  

The University Department of Health and Safety is located in the Health and Safety Building. 
The following is a list of Personnel and their areas of responsibility in this office. 

Mr. Edward M. Movitz, 
Health and Safety Officer  
915-5433 
movitz@olemiss.edu 

Mr. W. Scott Rone,  
Radiation Safety Coordinator  
915-5433 
srone@olemiss.edu 

Mrs. Suzanne Irby 
Senior Staff Assistant 
915-5433 
sue@olemiss.edu 

Mr. Shane Kesler 
Environmental Health and Safety Specialist 
915-5433 
skesler@olemiss.edu 

4. RIGHT TO KNOW; 

4.1 RIGHTS; 

Employees are guaranteed the following rights with regard to toxic substances: 

A. Right to know the identity of toxic substances encountered during the course of their 
employment. 

B. Right to refuse to work with a toxic substance, if information about it is not provided within 5 
working days after filing a written request with the University Department of Health and Safety. 

C. Right to refuse to work with a toxic or hazardous substance if proper safety equipment or safe 
guards are not provided by the University. 

D. Right to training within 30 days of employment (annually thereafter) in the safe use of any 
hazardous material encountered in the course of their employment. 

E. Right to training when a new hazard is introduced into the workplace. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 7 of 32 

F. Right to protection against discharge, discipline, or discrimination as a result of exercising any 
of the above rights. 

4.2 SERVICES TO PROTECT RIGHTS; 

In order to insure that employees' right to know is protected, the Department of Health and 
Safety will provide the following services: 

A. Material Safety Data Sheets 

The Department of Health and Safety will maintain a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on all 
hazardous or toxic materials in use on the Oxford campus. The MSDS will contain the following 
information: 
1. The chemical and/or common name of the substance; 
2. The physical and chemical characteristics of the material; 
3. The known acute and chronic health risks; 
4. The primary routes of entry and symptoms of exposure; 
5. The proper precautions, handling practices, protective equipment, and other safety procedures 
used to limit potential exposure to toxic or hazardous materials; 
6. Emergency treatment for overexposure; 
7. Emergency procedures for spills, fire, and disposal; 
8. A description in common language of the known specific potential health risks posed by the 
toxic substance. 

Copies of the MSDS are available from the Department of Health and Safety. It is the 
responsibility of individual supervisors to request this information.  

B. Safety Training 

The following safety training requirements apply to faculty, staff and graduate students working 
with chemical materials on the Oxford Campus. These training requirements will also apply to 
undergraduate students when they are working in these areas in other than a regularly scheduled 
University course. Use of any of the materials listed below requires the signing of the appropriate 
"Safety Agreement" form. 

GENERAL CHEMICAL SAFETY TRAINING: All faculty, staff and graduate students working 
with chemicals on the Oxford campus are required to take the chemical safety training program 
and to pass a written examination on chemical safety. Annual retraining is not required. A 
special safety training program is required for Physical Plant Personnel 

CARCINOGENIC SAFETY TRAINING: All University personnel and all students are required 
to have special safety training in the handling and use of carcinogenic materials and written 
authorization prior to starting any work with carcinogenic compounds. A laboratory with a Class 
II or better Fume Hood is required for the handling of carcinogenic materials. A pre-requisite to 
this training is completion of the General Chemical Safety Training. Application to use 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 8 of 32 

carcinogens is made through the Department of Health & Safety. Annual retraining is not 
required for continued authorization. 

5. CHEMICAL SAFETY;  

This portion of the manual is concerned with the procurement, use and disposal of hazardous 
chemicals on The University of Mississippi, Oxford Campus. All applicable regulations are not 
reprinted here, only those regulations which are relevant to the University community with 
regard to hazardous chemical substances. 

5.1 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS;  

The regulations and procedures set forth below apply to all persons who procure, receive, 
possess, use, generate, or dispose of hazardous chemicals on The University of Mississippi, 
Oxford Campus. 

5.2 HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS; 

A laboratory worker may be faced with many different types of hazardous materials. The 
substances with which they work may be ignitable, corrosive, reactive, toxic, carcinogenic, 
biologically active or radioactive. Effects of exposure to these materials may lead to an array of 
effects, some immediate, such as loss of sight, or effect which do not become obvious for a 
period of time, such as reduced fertility or cancer. Chemicals constitute a major concern for 
laboratory personnel. 

THE TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN PERSONAL VEHICLES IS 
PROHIBITED. THE UNIVERSITY WILL NOT TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERSONS 
WHO CARRY HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN VEHICLES NOT OWNED OR OPERATED 
BY THE UNIVERSITY. 

A hazardous chemical is one that poses a danger to human health or to the environment, if 
improperly handled. The EPA has divided hazardous chemicals into several categories, including 
: 

A. Ignitable Materials  
These materials give off heat, smoke, soot and may disperse toxic pollutants and by-products 
into the air. They generally have a Flash Point below 60 deg. C (140 deg F). Examples are 
Gasoline and Isopropyl Alcohol. 

B. Corrosive Chemicals  
These materials can cause injury to the skin or body, or destroy their own containers or other 
materials and be released into the environment. They generally have a pH below 2 or above 12.5. 
Examples are Nitric Acid and Sodium Hydroxide. 

C. Reactive Chemicals 
These materials can detonate, explode or give off poisonous gases when exposed to light, air, 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 9 of 32 

water or other materials. This category also includes oxidizers, cyanides and sulfides. An 
example is Sodium metal. 

D. Toxic Chemicals  
These materials can cause serious illness or death from exposure by inhalation, ingestion or 
absorption through the skin. The quantity of a substance necessary to kill 50 % of an exposed 
animal population in laboratory tests within a specified period of time is called an LD50. The 
EPA definition of a toxic chemical is a materials that possesses an LD50 Rat(orally) < 50 
MG/KG, an LD50 Rat (inhalation) < 200 ppm, or an LD50 Rabbit (dermally) < 200 MG/KG. An 
example of this type of material is Lead Acetate. 

E. Listed Waste 
Materials regulated by the US EPA as a hazardous waste. 

F. Listed Constituent 
Materials regulated as hazardous based upon component or constituent levels. 
Any material which possesses one or more of the above characteristics is considered hazardous 
by the EPA, the State of Mississippi, and for the regulatory purposes of this manual.  

G. Investigational Compounds and Research Materials. These materials, commonly handled in 
research laboratories may include Novel / Synthetic Compounds, Extracts, Diagnostic 
Specimens, or compounds of undetermined toxicity. Always follow established laboratory 
procedures and techniques, and use appropriate protective equipment while using these 
materials. Treat all unknown compounds and investigational materials as toxic. 

5.3 PROCUREMENT OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS;  

Federal and State laws require that a record of the procurement of all chemicals coming on the 
Oxford Campus of The University of Mississippi be maintained as part of the "cradle to grave" 
reporting requirements of the regulations set forth in section 2.1 A. Chemicals may be acquired 
either by purchasing them or, in some instances, by having materials given to the user for free.  

A. Purchases 

A copy of the receiving reports of all chemicals procured through the University Purchasing 
Department will automatically be sent to the Department of Health and Safety by the Purchasing 
Dept. No special action is required on the part of the user. 

B. Gifts  

All significant quantities of chemicals which are received by departments, laboratories, or 
individuals, i.e., free samples, gifts of chemicals, etc. which are not handled through the 
Purchasing Department, require prior approval from the Department of Health and Safety before 
they are accepted by the person or department receiving the material(s). Notification of 
Procurement is to be accomplished by completing form DHS-5 (available from the DHS) and 
sending the completed form to the Department of Health and Safety. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 10 of 32 

The DHS will record information concerning chemicals (chemical name, quantity, date of 
receipt, etc.) and enter it into a computer database used to monitor the procurement of chemicals 
at the University. No action is necessary for materials produced (synthesized) at the University. 

5.4 RESTRICTED MATERIALS; 

Certain materials pose unusual hazards and as a result will have additional restrictions placed 
upon their purchase and use. In some situations it may be necessary to cancel the purchase or 
otherwise delay the use of these materials until adequate facilities and/or personnel resources can 
become available for the particular material. The following are the materials that are 
RESTRICTED MATERIALS on the Oxford campus together with the specific regulations 
dealing with their purchase and use. 

A. Carcinogens  

Materials on the "LIST OF CARCINOGENS", are strictly regulated by the Department of Health 
and Safety. The current list is available from DHS at 5433. The purchase and use of these 
materials are governed by the following regulations: 
1. All faculty, staff or graduate students who order or use these materials must complete Form 
DHS-81, "Application to Use Carcinogens", in the Appendix. Approval of the Chancellor of this 
application is required before these materials can be used. 
2. The work areas in which these materials are used or stored must be approved by the 
Department of Health and Safety. 
3. The work areas and storage areas for these materials must be posted as to the presence of 
carcinogens. 

B. Perchloric Acid  

Perchloric acid can become an extremely dangerous material if used incorrectly, and under a 
variety of conditions, e.g. heating, dehydration, combination with organic materials, and shock. 
As a result, The following regulations must be adhered to : 

The purchase of this material in 72 % or greater concentration will require the prior approval of 
the Department of Health and Safety. Approval to use this material will require the submission of 
Form DHS-26, Appendix B, together with the Purchase Requisition to the Department of Health 
and Safety. Following approval by this office, the Purchase Requisition will be forwarded to the 
Purchasing Department. The Purchasing Department will not accept Purchase Requisitions for 
this material without the approval of the Department of Health and Safety 

C. Radioisotopes  

See the current University Radiation Safety Manual. 

D. Cyanide Compounds  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 11 of 32 

Many cyanide compounds are extremely poisonous, and most have the ability to undergo 
chemical reactions which may result in a release of toxic vapors. In many instances, these vapors 
are undetectable by taste or by odor. Therefore, approval is required for processes or experiments 
involving cyanide containing compounds. Written protocols must be submitted to Health and 
Safety prior to starting any work with cyanides. DHS may require additional safety measures, 
monitoring equipment, supplies, and/or training.  

E. Explosives 

All purchases and gifts of explosive materials, including all multi-nitrated materials, must be 
coordinated through DHS prior to purchases or receipt. Explosive materials located at the 
University are subject to immediate removal by DHS unless written authorization from the 
Health and Safety Officer is immediately available at the materials location. 

5.5 CHEMICAL SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE; 

The way that a research project is conducted in a laboratory is an important factor in laboratory 
safety. It is the factor which can be affected most by the attitude of personnel in a laboratory. For 
a workplace to be safe, everyone must be supportive of, and take responsibility for, laboratory 
safety - for themselves and their co-workers. Failure to observe regulations, could lead to 
disciplinary action under employee standards as well as state and federal regulations. 

A. Departmental Safety Committee 

Every department with chemical laboratories, or operations involving the use of chemicals, shall 
establish a chemical safety committee, or appoint an individual, to be responsible for safety 
programs within the department. The committee shall be responsible for: 
1. Developing a safety program for the department which includes the procedures outlined in this 
manual plus additional procedures as needed to meet the particular needs of the department; 
2. Resolving safety problems within the department, when possible, and  
3. Acting as a liaison between the department and the DHS. 

B. Laboratory chain of command 
 
Post phone numbers for the laboratory chain of command within the laboratory and in the 
departmental office for emergency use.  

C. Planning 
 
Appropriate planning can substantially reduce the risks associated with using chemicals. When 
planning out a research program or classroom related projects, many factors should be 
considered in addition to whether or not a specific material will serve a desired purpose. These 
factors may include, but are not limited to : 
1. Does the specific material pose any special hazards ? 
2. Are there alternative materials or procedures which can be utilized ? 
3. Have all personnel involved in the project been informed of the potential risks ? Have they 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 12 of 32 

agreed to participate and accept the risks ? 
4. Will specialized training be necessary, and if so, who will do it and what areas will be 
addressed ? 
5. Will the use of specific materials require additional protective equipment ? Are funds 
available to provide this equipment ?  
6. Will the planned research require upgrading of existing facilities ? Are funds available for 
renovations ? 
7. How much material is necessary ? Are storage facilities adequate ?  
8. Does the substance degrade rapidly ? Can amounts be kept on hand which will be utilized 
quickly ?  
9. What quantities of hazardous wastes will be generated by the project ?  
10. Will the disposal of waste products or reagents pose particular problems ? 
11. Will the cost for the disposal of waste products exceed the amount funded for the research ?  

If the answer to any of the above questions is yes, it would be prudent to consult the DHS prior 
to the start of a research project. Discussion with the DHS prior to the start of a project may 
reduce or eliminate potential problems before they occur. 

For academic programs, the responsible person should consult the DHS for assistance. 

D. Procedures and Accident Prevention  

Although accidents can occur during the acquisition process and while chemicals are in storage, 
the most likely time for them to happen is while chemicals are being handled and used. No 
manual intended to cover all the laboratory operations at a major research institution can cover 
every procedure and every precaution which might be involved.  

1. It is the responsibility of immediate supervisors as well as department heads to insure that 
personnel working for them are fully informed with regard to the procedures for safe handling 
and use of hazardous chemicals. 
2. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) which provide all necessary information in this regard 
are available from the Department of Health and Safety, Room 200, Old Power Plant, 915-5433. 
Additional information should be sought from the laboratory supervisor, the departmental safety 
committee, instruction manuals, the labels on chemical containers, or from the DHS at 5433. 
3. There are basically two different types of risks which will be involved in laboratories, physical 
injuries such as would result from fire or explosion and health related problems. Good work 
practices will minimize the likelihood of both types of problems. Among recommended practices 
are: 
a. Plan the work carefully. Analyze for possible failures and consider the consequences. 
b. Make sure the right equipment is available and is in good condition. 
c. If a system is involved, make sure it is assembled solidly. 
d. If a release of toxic fumes may occur, the work must be done in a hood. 
e. An explosion shield is required if an explosion or a runaway reaction is possible. 
f. Do not hurry unnecessarily or compromise on safety. Preferably, no one should work alone or, 
at a minimum, without someone else being aware of their activity and checking occasionally. 
g. Wear appropriate clothing and personal protective equipment. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 13 of 32 

h. Good housekeeping is always conducive to safety. 
I. Finally, know all of your safety procedures. 

E. Laboratory Organization 

The space within a laboratory should be organized as much as possible to separate areas of high 
and low risk activities. It should not be necessary to pass through high risk areas routinely or, in 
the event of an emergency, escape routes should always be placed through the safest areas within 
the laboratory. Traffic flow should be minimized in the vicinity of equipment which involves 
generation of fumes, ( fume hoods, distillation units, etc.), where air disturbances may cause 
fumes to be dispersed. Flammable materials should be separated as much as possible from 
sources of ignition, such as Bunsen burners. Safety showers and eyewashes should be readily 
accessible from every point within the laboratory. 

F. Safety Equipment 

It is the responsibility of individual work units or departments to provide any safety equipment 
necessary to use a given hazardous chemical. It is the duty of unit supervisors to insure that 
safety equipment is used properly. These items may include, but are not limited to, fumehoods, 
gloves, safety glasses, respirators, etc. The University Department of Health and Safety should 
be contacted for advice in this regard. 

G. Accidents 

Accidental spills, injury of personnel, or releases to the environment involving a hazardous 
chemical must be reported immediately to the University Department of Health and Safety. 
Within three (3) working days, form DHS-3 must be completed and filed with the University 
Department of Health and Safety. Guidelines for chemical spills and other emergencies are given 
in Sections 6 and 7 below. 

H. Eating, Studying and Other Social Activities 

It must be recognized that in the absence of a convenient, nearby area specifically set aside for 
eating, studying, and other social activities, that the laboratory area will be used for these 
purposes. An area within the laboratory may be set aside and clearly defined where these 
activities are permissible and these activities must be strictly prohibited outside this area. An 
educational program, based on the actual risks within the laboratory, should be established by the 
laboratory supervisor and reviewed with each new employee and graduate student. The actual 
use of the laboratory for these purposes should be discouraged as much as possible. In certain 
high risk facilities, such uses must, in fact, be prohibited and alternative convenience areas 
established. Examples of such high risk areas would be carcinogenic research laboratories, 
biological research laboratories and radiological laboratories. Under no circumstances are eating 
or drinking to be allowed in undergraduate academic laboratories or work areas which use 
chemicals or hazardous materials. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 14 of 32 

I. Contact Lenses  

The use of contact lens has certain advantages in many situations outside of the laboratory. 
However, in wet chemistry laboratories, or wherever the likelihood exists of chemical injury to 
the eyes, contact lenses may pose additional problems should chemicals get into the eyes. This is 
due to the fact that chemicals are drawn under the lenses by capillary action. This action 
increases the risk that water from an eyewash fountain could be prevented from reaching the 
injured area. Therefore, the University has arranged for a series of no-vent goggles (which meet 
ANSI Z87.1-1979 standard)to be available for purchase at the bookstore which will satisfy the 
safety equipment requirements of section 5.5 F (Safety equipment) while allowing for the use of 
contact lenses by persons in laboratories using or storing chemicals. In the event that these 
specific goggles or their no-vent equivalent are not utilized, the use of contact lenses by persons 
in laboratories using or storing chemicals will be forbidden. 

J. Children and Hazardous Chemicals  

Children, i.e., those under the age of 16, are prohibited from being in, touring, or visiting, any 
area where hazardous materials are used or stored. 

5.6 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS; 

Chemicals must be identified and stored properly to avoid unwanted reactions, and to reduce 
risks to response personnel during emergency situations. 

A. Definition of Chemical Storage  

The storage of chemicals implies the accumulation or retention of chemical substances for use in 
other than current activities.  

B. Labeling  

Prior to storing a chemical, it must be properly labeled. Often the label provided by the 
manufacturer or distributor will include most of the required information. However, in some 
cases, laboratory or stockroom personnel must provide additional information to a label, e.g., the 
dating of an ether container. If the manufacturer's label is found to be inadequate, laboratory 
personnel should take time to add the extra information to a label, as necessary. Additional 
information on container labeling can be obtained from the DHS. 
The chemical label should include a minimum of the following information : 
1. The chemical name of the material. 
2. The date received or produced (to be added by the user). 
3. Hazardous properties such as flammability, reactivity, corrosiveness, toxicity, etc.. 
4. Additional safety information or precautions such as use in hoods, protective equipment 
recommended, etc.. 

Additional optional information may include fire fighting equipment or first aid measures. 
Additional information can be acquired as necessary from the DHS. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 15 of 32 

C. Stockroom Storage 
 
Stockroom personnel will be required to: 
1. Date all chemicals, 
2. Separate incompatible materials, i.e., store chemicals in accord with the compatibility chart, 
Tale 1 in the Appendix, 
3. Keep a separate record of time-limited chemicals,(Ethers, etc.), 
4. Reduce unnecessary storage of chemicals that may deteriorate, and 
5. Maintain reagent labeling and container integrity. 

D. Laboratory Storage and Individual Requirements  

Individual users and laboratories which store chemicals will be required to label all chemical 
containers as to: 
1. Chemical composition, or an appropriate lab notebook reference number if the exact 
composition has not been determined. 
2. Date the substance was made or the container filled, 
3. Laboratory or responsible person, and, 
4. Store chemicals in accordance with the compatibility chart in Appendix A. 

E. Storage Cabinets  

Maximum storage limits for flammable liquids in approved safety cabinets are sixty (60) gallons 
of liquids with a flash point less than 140 deg. F and 120 gallons of liquids with a flash point 
greater than 140 deg. F. Storage cabinets should, but are not required, to be vented. 

F. Refrigerated Storage  

Standard refrigerators and freezers must not be used for the storage of flammable liquids. The 
vapors collected in these confined spaces represent a major explosion hazard if ignition occurs. 
Ether, for example, will ignite at temperatures below minus 40 deg. C. A normal refrigerator has 
several components which will generate sparks including the light switch and the thermostat. 
Self defrosting models frequently have a drain hole in the bottom which may allow the vapors to 
be ignited by the compressor motor. 

The following refrigerators are acceptable for the storage of flammable substances : 
1. "Flammable Storage" refrigerators and freezers which have been modified inside the 
refrigerator (this can be done by Physical Plant), and 
2. "Explosion Proof" refrigerators and freezers which, in addition to protecting against 
flammable vapors inside the unit, are designed to operate in atmospheres where excessive 
concentrations of flammable vapors are expected to be present. These units must be permanently 
wired into the laboratory. The extra protection afforded by explosion proof refrigerators and 
freezers is not required for solvent storage under normal laboratory conditions. These units 
would be of little additional value unless all sources of ignition were eliminated from the room. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 16 of 32 

G. Food Storage 

STORAGE OF FOOD IN REFRIGERATORS INTENDED FOR LABORATORY USE, 
INCLUDING STORAGE OF CHEMICALS, FLAMMABLE MATERIALS, ETC., MUST 
NEVER BE USED FOR THE STORAGE OF FOOD PRODUCTS BY LABORATORY 
PERSONNEL ! 

H. Gas Cylinders  

1. High pressure cylinders (>240 psig)  
High pressure cylinders are extremely dangerous, even if the gas is not reactive. A ruptured 
cylinder or one with a broken valve will emit the released gases at high velocities with great 
force, converting the cylinder into  
the equivalent of an uncontrollable rocket. 

The following requirements must be adhered to in order to safely store and transport high 
pressure gas cylinders: 
a. Safe cylinder storage areas must be provided which cannot be in stairwells or within a required 
exit corridor. 

b. All cylinders must be secured by chains or straps in an upright position at all times so that they 
cannot fall. 
c. Manual transportation of cylinders must always be done with a cylinder cart or similar hand 
truck on which the cylinders are securely fastened with a strap or chain. They are never to be 
lifted by the valve protection cap or dragged, rolled, slid, dropped or permitted to strike hard 
objects or another cylinder. 
d. Cylinders must not be used without a regulator valve. 
e. Cylinders not in use must have the valve protection cap in place. The cap must be securely 
attached and screwed on. 
f. Empty cylinders should be segregated and marked "EMPTY" or "MT" 
g. Never lay a cylinder down as the top valve may be damaged. 

2. Low pressure gas cylinders (< 240 psig)  
Low pressure cylinders should be handled, stored and used with the same care as high pressure 
cylinders. A regulator is suggested for all cylinder applications, however, some procedures 
involving low pressure cylinders will not require the use of a regulator. These applications 
should be reviewed by Health and Safety prior to a project start. Acceptability of a procedure 
involving the use of a low pressure cylinder without a regulator will depend upon several factors 
including, but not limited to: 
a. Is the apparatus capable of withstanding the full pressure of the cylinder should the entire 
contents uncontrollably pour in, and, 
b. Is the ventilation system available capable of removing hazardous vapors from the work area 
efficiently enough to prevent personnel injury should the cylinder release too much gas either too 
quickly or at too high a pressure. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 17 of 32 

5.7 SPECIAL STORAGE REQUIREMENTS; 

A. Ethers 

In addition to being flammable, explosive peroxides may be formed in ethers that have been 
stored for a long period of time. A minor shock, such as the twisting off of the top, may be 
sufficient to detonate the material. Peroxide formation is also increased by exposure to light and 
contact with air. 

Ethers should, therefore, be ordered in small quantities so that the material is used quickly, the 
container must be dated when received, and discarded through the DHS after six (6) months from 
the date the material is opened. Unopened containers should be discarded twelve (12) months 
after the material is received. 

Table 2 in the Appendix lists some of the more common materials which have been known to 
form peroxides. For additional information on materials which may form peroxides, contact the 
DHS at 5433. 

Although ethers should definitely be discarded once they have aged past the acceptable time 
limits outlined above, it is both prudent and appropriate to test these materials periodically for 
the presence of peroxides. 

To test for peroxides, shake 10 ml. ether with 1 ml. 10 %Potassium Iodide in a small glass 
stoppered cylinder of colorless glass that is protected from light. View the mixture against a 
white background. The absence of any color in either layer indicates that no peroxides are 
present. IF YOU HAVE ANY DOUBTS CONCERNING THE SAFETY OF A MATERIAL, 
DO NOT ATTEMPT TO TEST THE MATERIAL. IMMEDIATELY CONSULT WITH THE 
DHS FOR ASSISTANCE OR INFORMATION. 

B. Flammable Liquids  
Flammable and combustible liquids must be stored in appropriate containers according to their 
characteristics. 

Table 3 in the Appendix lists the maximum size containers to be used for the storage of 
flammable liquids. Larger sizes may be stored if the material is housed in approved safety cans 
or DOT approved shipping containers. 

Within a laboratory, the maximum amounts of flammable liquids that may be stored outside of 
approved safety containers or storage cabinets are as follows : 

RESEARCH LABORATORIES 

10 GALLONS OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS or, 
 

20 GALLONS OF COMBINED FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 18 of 32 

TEACHING LABORATORIES 

 
5 GALLONS OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS or 

 
10 GALLONS OF COMBINED FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 

 
Exceptions may be made, on a case by case basis, in areas that house several research 
laboratories in one large area. 

Any amount of flammable and combustible liquids in excess of the above stated amounts must 
be stored in either approved storage cabinets, storage rooms, or approved safety cans. Bulk 
quantities of flammable liquids in thirty (30) or fifty five (55) gallon drums are only permitted in 
storage areas equipped with explosion-proof electrical wiring. 

Flammable liquids in a laboratory should not be stored between the normal work area and an exit 
from the laboratory.  

C. Perchloric Acid  

Perchloric acid is an extremely corrosive agent that requires special precautions. It becomes 
explosive under a variety of conditions, such as heating, dehydration, combination with organic 
material, and shock. Due to these hazards, approval from the DHS is required before Perchloric 
acid in concentrations greater than 72 % can be purchased.  

Prior to working with Perchloric acid, an individual should thoroughly review the procedures to 
be followed and the risks posed by its use. An excellent reference on the risks is the CRC 
Handbook of Laboratory Safety, 3rd Edition. 

Any procedures which involve heating of Perchloric acid must be carried out in a specially 
designed and dedicated Perchloric acid fume hood. These hoods include a wash down system, a 
vertical duct system without organic materials used at the joints, and an exhaust duct which 
exhausts fumes well above the roof top. 

If concentrations above 85% are to be used, protection in addition to that normally used for acids 
must be used. This protection must include thick gauntlets, a face shield and an explosion shield 
within the hood. A second informed person should be available nearby to provide routine and 
emergency assistance. 

Unused Perchloric acid should be disposed of through the DHS as the material becomes more 
unstable with time. Discoloration of anhydrous Perchloric acid indicates that immediate disposal 
is needed. 

 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 19 of 32 

D. Reactive Materials  

Sodium, potassium, and phosphorous react vigorously with water or with humidity in the air and 
must be kept in oil filled containers which protect them from such exposure. If the materials are 
inadvertently exposed to moisture, excessive heat can be generated which could cause a fire, or 
within a confined space, an explosion due to high pressures. Laboratories in which reactive 
metals are used should be provided with class D fire extinguishers. Work using these materials 
should be within a fume hood behind an explosion shield. Personnel should wear safety goggles 
or a face shield and heavy gloves when working with reactive materials. 

E Explosives  

Explosives shall not be stored in laboratories under normal circumstances. However, where 
storage of explosives is necessary, they shall be stored in magazines according ATF Regulations, 
27 CFR 55. Call the DHS at 5433 for details.  

F. Gasoline  

In accordance with applicable federal regulations, the storage of gasoline in any building on the 
Oxford campus is strictly forbidden.  

5.8 DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS; 

The disposal of hazardous chemicals is strictly regulated under the Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act, the Mississippi Hazardous Waste Management Regulations, and the EPA 
regulations CFR 40, parts 100 - 399. Chemicals must be disposed of only through the 
Department of Health and Safety. This will normally be done at no cost to the generator if the 
following procedures are strictly adhered to. Individuals who do not follow procedures in 
complying with state and federal regulations are individually responsible for possible fines 
and/or imprisonment. Call the DHS at 5433 when you have waste materials for disposal. Waste 
Chemicals are normally picked up on Monday and Wednesday, weather permitting. Only the 
Chemical Safety Coordinator is authorized to pick up waste chemicals. THE TRANSPORT OF 
WASTE CHEMICALS TO THE DHS FACILITIES BY PERSONS OTHER THAN THE 
CHEMICAL SAFETY COORDINATOR IS PROHIBITED. 

A. Sewage Disposal  

NO HAZARDOUS CHEMICAL SUBSTANCE SHALL BE DISPOSED OF INTO THE 
SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM, INTO THE ATMOSPHERE, OR INTO THE NORMAL 
UNIVERSITY TRASH SYSTEM. All chemical waste must be collected in suitable containers 
as described in Section 5.8.D.1 for processing and disposal by or under the supervision of the 
Chemical Safety Coordinator. In the event of uncertainty, call the DHS for advice. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 20 of 32 

B. Recoverable Materials 
 
Any person or unit wishing to dispose of a chemical must first investigate the possibility of 
recovery, exchange, or returning the material to stock. 

C. Chemical Exchanges  

Excess, unwanted, or unneeded chemicals in good condition need not be disposed of, if they can 
be reused. The University Department of Health and Safety has set up a retained-chemical 
storage area where unwanted or partially used containers of chemicals can be stored, provided 
they are properly labeled with the chemical name and the identity of the material can be 
reasonably assured. A list of available chemicals is published periodically by the Department of 
Health and Safety. This exchange will work provided that: 
1. The donor of the chemical can give a reasonable assurance of the chemical's identity, 
2. The recipient accepts full responsibility for the identity and quality of the chemical, and, 
3. Chemicals that form peroxides or are explosive cannot be exchanged. 

Requests for materials will be taken by phone at 5433. 

D. Request for Hazardous Material Disposal (DHS-4)  

When a chemical cannot be reused or exchanged, then a request for disposal must be filed with 
the Department of Health and Safety using Form DHS-4. A chemical and physical analysis of the 
material must be submitted with Form DHS-4. In the event of uncertainty, call the DHS. Pickups 
of hazardous chemical waste will be accomplished by the Chemical Safety Coordinator. 
Hazardous chemical waste must be shipped off site within a period of time specified in the most 
current revisions of the regulations listed in section 2.1 of this manual. 

NO CONTAINERS OF CHEMICAL WASTE WILL BE REMOVED BY THE 
CHEMICAL SAFETY COORDINATOR UNLESS THEY ARE PROPERLY LABELED 
ACCORDING TO 5.6.D.1 AND A COMPLETED FORM DHS-4 HAS BEEN FILED AND 
REVIEWED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SAFETY. CHEMICAL 
WASTE MUST BE NONPATHOGENIC, NONINFECTIOUS, NONEXPLOSIVE, NON-
COMPRESSED, AND NONRADIOACTIVE. 

1. Containers  
Chemicals for disposal must be placed in a nonreactive, sealed container with a screw type cap. 
The exterior of the container must be CLEAN. Containers with cracked or corroded caps will not 
be accepted. These containers must be conspicuously labeled as follows: 
a. "WASTE", 
b. Chemical Name or names, 
c. Laboratory or Responsible Person, 
d. Date container was filled or purchased, 
e. Appropriate hazard warnings (Request MSDS, if needed). 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 21 of 32 

2. Mixtures  
Incompatible wastes shall not be placed or mixed in the same container, see the compatibility 
table in the Appendix for more information. This restriction is intended to prevent any 
potentially dangerous reaction, explosion, or release of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes during the 
waste handling process. 

3. Unusual Waste Disposal  
Explosives, PCB contaminated materials, equipment containing PCBs or any waste possessing 
unusual disposal problems outside of the normal operations of the University waste management 
plan will be handled provided that the department submitting the waste will assume financial 
responsibility for the costs involved. For additional information in this regard, contact the Health 
and Safety Officer of the Department of Health and Safety, 915-5433.  

4. Unknown Chemical Disposal  
Disposal of unknown chemicals will be handled by the Department of Health and Safety, on a 
case by case basis, provided the department submitting the chemicals for disposal are willing to 
assume financial responsibility for the costs of the analyses required to determine the identity or 
composition of the material.  

E. Used Motor Oil 

All persons on the Oxford Campus, including the residents of the University operated 
dormitories and apartments, the Faculty and Staff houses and apartments, and the residents of the 
Fraternity and Sorority Houses, are now responsible for collecting Motor Oil, and for ensuring 
proper disposal and handling of this material. The Physical Plant Service Station (915-7304) will 
collect used motor oil from all campus residents, at no charge. The service station will not pick 
up used oil. Please call the station or the Physical Plant (915-7051) if you need additional 
instruction or directions.  

F. Battery Disposal 

Certain types of rechargeable batteries are now regulated as hazardous waste for disposal 
purposes. The amount of Cadmium in common rechargeable NiCad batteries is causes these 
items to be regulated as a hazardous waste. The same is true for lithium, lead acid, led-Gel and 
for mercury batteries. In order to fully comply with applicable regulations, DHS will accept these 
batteries from all campus sources for proper disposal. Common batteries, and alkaline batteries 
are to be discarded with normal trash. Vehicle batteries should be delivered to the Physical Plant 
Service Station. 

G. Chemical Waste Storage Facility  

The chemical waste storage facilities for temporary storage and processing of chemical waste is 
located behind the University Waste Water Treatment Plant. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 22 of 32 

5.9 LABORATORY CLOSE-OUT PROCEDURE;  

Please give a minimum of 30 days notice to the DHS at 5433 before moving or 
closing out a laboratory. The following items must be evaluated by the DHS during closeout: 

A. Unwanted Chemicals  

Chemicals that are no longer wanted maybe offered for return to campus stockrooms or offered 
for reuse to other campus laboratories through the chemical exchange. As storage space on the 
Exchange is limited, your cooperation in promptly notifying the DHS will help with an orderly 
transfer, and avoid lengthy delays in closing out a laboratory. 

B. Unusable Materials  

Chemicals that cannot be reused by other laboratories must be disposed of in compliance with 
the regulations set forth under section 5.8 "Disposal of Hazardous Chemicals". Complete 
identification of waste chemicals is required; analysis of unknowns will be required by the DHS. 

C. Unstable Materials  

Materials which may have become unstable, such as old ethers, must be brought to the attention 
of the DHS as soon as they are discovered. Arrangements will be made with disposal teams to 
remove the explosives safely. As these arrangements take time, prompt notification is again 
emphasized to avoid delays. 

D. Equipment  

Equipment that may build up corrosive deposits, such as Kjeldahl acid digestion units, must be 
decontaminated before the laboratory is closed out. This applies even if the equipment will not 
be moved. 

E. Moving  

Prudent practices should be used in transferring hazardous chemicals and materials from one lab 
to another. Contact the DHS for assistance. 

6. CHEMICAL SPILLS;  

6.1 GENERAL PROCEDURES;  

Minor spills should be cleaned up immediately by laboratory personnel, using a procedure such 
as those outlined below, providing the material is not immediately dangerous to life and health 
(IDLH) and equipment is available. Otherwise, evacuate the immediate area. For spills of 
moderate size, call the DHS at 5433 (days) or 7234 (evenings and weekends). Again assuming 
the material is not IDLH level, DHS personnel will provide technical assistance and guidance to 
laboratory personnel in cleaning up spilled materials. For moderate to large spills of ordinarily 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 23 of 32 

dangerous materials, e.g. acid, etc., evacuate the building, either personally or through the 
building alarm system, call 5433 to report the incident or call the University Police Department 
at 7234 and report the incident asking the dispatcher to notify the DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
AND SAFETY. Those involved in the incident are to remain available outside the building to 
assist the Emergency Response Team. After the initial notification, the laboratory supervisor, 
and the department head are to be notified. 

In the event of a fire of any but the smallest size, where you are confident that it can be put out 
without risk of spreading or danger to yourself, call 9-911 and report the fire. The building is to 
be evacuated. If the fire is in a building that normally houses hazardous materials, the fire 
department will notify the DHS. 

In the event of an emergency involving personal injury, call 7234 and ask for an 
ambulance. If an eye injury or skin exposure is involved, assist the injured person to use either an 
eyewash station or safety shower, or both. For more specific information on chemical exposure, 
see the applicable sections which follow. Personnel should become familiar with emergency 
procedures before they are needed. It is suggested that all laboratory personnel familiarize 
themselves with the proper emergency procedures for those materials with which they work. For 
additional information, see section 4.2 for requesting a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). 

The following information should serve as a general guide in the event some of the more 
common emergency situations found in operations involving chemicals and laboratory work. 
This information is not meant to cover all situations. However, the following steps should 
provide an acceptable guide to personnel if an emergency should arise: 

A. Stop, Think, Stay Calm! 

Immediately alert your neighbors and your supervisor. 

B. Clothing 

All contaminated clothing must be removed immediately and the skin washed with soap and cool 
water. Flush skin with cool water for no less than fifteen minutes. Health and Safety should be 
consulted before contaminated clothing is reused,  
laundered or discarded. 

C. Can You Clean It Yourself? 

If there is not a fire hazard and the material is not particularly volatile or toxic, clean it up as 
directed by your supervisor. To facilitate cleaning up liquids, use an absorbent material, 
preferably one that will neutralize the liquids if possible. Always use appropriate protective 
equipment as directed by your supervisor, or consult with Health and Safety for additional 
information or assistance. 

D. Volatile, Flammable, or Toxic Material 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 24 of 32 

If a volatile, flammable, or toxic material is spilled, immediately warn everyone to extinguish 
flames and turn off spark producing equipment such as brush-type motors. Shut down all 
equipment and vacate the room until it is decontaminated. Notify the Hazardous Material 
Response Team at 5433 (days) or 7234 (evenings and weekends) to supervise the 
decontamination. The supervisor will be responsible for designating the extent of the proper 
cleanup procedure. The following substances are very hazardous and cleanup should be handled 
by the Hazardous Material Response Team: 

Aromatic Amines Bromine  Carbon Disulfide Cyanides   

Ethers   Organic Halides Perchloric Acid Picric Acid 

Avoid skin contact and, to prevent inhalation, wear appropriate breathing apparatus. It has been 
demonstrated that chemical spills or splashes on clothing allows the materials a greater surface 
contact area with the skin and facilitates skin absorption. Therefore, spills on the clothing, and 
even the clothing if necessary, should be immediately removed to prevent skin penetration. 

E. Small Spills 

Many small liquid spills (<100 ML) can be absorbed with paper towels, sand, or an absorbent. 
However, paper towels can increase the surface area and evaporation, increasing the fire hazard. 
Most small solid spills can be brushed up and disposed in appropriate solid-waste containers, but 
care must be exercised to avoid reactive combinations. Don't leave paper towels or other 
materials used to clean up a spill in open trash cans in the work area, or in any manner which 
may cause an unnecessary exposure to a fellow employee. Contact the DHS for the proper 
disposal of all waste chemical materials 

F. Acid Chlorides  

For acid chloride spills use calcined absorbent products, such as Oil-Dri(tm) or Zorb-All(tm), or 
dry sand. Avoid contact with skin. 

G. Mercury  

Mercury is used in many laboratory instruments, such as thermometers, manometers, and 
diffusion pumps. One of the most common laboratory accidents is to have a mercury spill. 
Because of the high toxicity of mercury vapor, spilled mercury should be immediately and 
thoroughly cleaned up using an aspirator bulb or vacuum device. In these accidents, it is quite 
easy to exceed the permissible exposure limits of 0.05 mg/cubic meter since mercury has a 
substantial vapor pressure at room temperature. If not cleaned up promptly, the levels will 
increase as the mercury becomes divided into smaller and smaller droplets. The DHS should be 
called at 5433 in the event of an accidental spill if you require either specific instructions or 
supervision and assistance with a cleanup of spilled mercury. If a mercury cleanup unit is 
available, become familiar with its location and proper use. Domestic vacuum cleaners must not 
be used because they will only redisperse mercury aerosols and spread the contamination. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 25 of 32 

Mercury vapor monitors are available for determining the effectiveness of the cleanup from the 
DHS. Notify the DHS if you have waste materials for disposal. 

 

H. Alkali Metal  

A spill of an alkali metal should be smothered with powdered graphite or Met-L-X(tm) 
extinguisher. Sodium-potassium alloys (NaK)present even greater hazards than either sodium or 
potassium alone; strict observation of suppliers' recommendations must be followed. Particles of 
alkali metal splattered on the skin should be rapidly removed and the skin flushed quickly with 
cool water. If any metal on the skin becomes ignited, deluge it with large amounts of cold water 
immediately. 

I. White  (yellow) Phosphorous  

A spill of white (yellow) phosphorous should be blanketed with wet sand or wet absorbent and 
disposed of by the University Department of Health and Safety. If any white phosphorous is 
splattered on the skin, flush the skin with cold water and remove adhering phosphorous. Copper 
sulfate solution provides a visual aid in removing particles because it produces a dark color in 
contact with elemental phosphorous. 

J. Natural Gas  

Gases are found in virtually every laboratory, even if only in the form of the gas supply for the 
ubiquitous Bunsen burner. Gas services usually have an odor so that gas leaks are easily 
detectable. If the odor of gas is clearly detectable, do not make or break any electrical 
connections, such as using a light switch, but immediately call the Physical Plant at 7051 and 
report the problem. Care should be taken with lighted gas outlets to insure that the flame does not 
go out with the gas on.  

6.2 CHEMICALS SPILLED ON THE BODY OVER A LARGE AREA; 

A. Remove Contamination  

Quickly remove all contaminated clothing while using the safety shower. Seconds count, and no 
time should be wasted because of modesty. However, be careful not to spread the chemical on 
the skin, especially the eyes. Immediately flood the affected body area in cold water for at least 
15 minutes. Resume if pain returns. Wash off chemicals with a mild detergent and water, but do 
not use neutralizing chemicals, unguents, creams, lotions, or salves. Get medical attention as 
soon as possible. 

B. Know the Spilled Materials 

Your supervisor should make certain that the medical personnel understand exactly what 
chemicals are involved and that physicians, nurses, and paramedics recognize and use proper 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 26 of 32 

treatment for that exposure. Preferably this should be ensured in advance of any potential 
emergency. The exact chemical name should be supplied. For example, exposure to hydrochloric 
acid is very different medically than exposure to hydrofluoric acid, yet both are sometimes called 
simply "acids". 

6.3 CHEMICALS ON THE SKIN;  

Immediately flush with cold water for no less than fifteen minutes and wash with a mild 
detergent, preferably soap and water. If there is no visible burn, wash with warm water and soap, 
removing any jewelry to facilitate removal of any residual materials. If a delayed reaction is 
noted (often the next day), seek medical attention immediately and explain carefully what 
chemicals were involved. 

6.4 CORROSIVE CHEMICALS; 

All chemicals should be treated with care, but acids and bases, especially in high concentrations, 
need to be handled with special care. If they are allowed to get on the skin, they can cause severe 
injuries. In reactions, they can generate excessive heat and pressure, causing equipment to be 
damaged, possibly leading to injuries as well. 

Corrosive chemicals should always be transported in unbreakable safety carriers. Carts used for 
moving chemicals must have a lip to prevent accidents. Chemical splash goggles, aprons, and 
rubber gloves must be worn when handling corrosive chemicals. The goggles should be 
supplemented with a face mask where the probability of splashing exists. 

If corrosive chemicals do get on the skin or in the eyes, the area should be immediately washed 
thoroughly with copious amounts of cool water, up to 15 minutes for the eyes. Promptly seek 
medical attention. Burns from acids are typically more painful than those from alkalis since acids 
precipitate a protein barrier on contact with tissue, which causes pain but also helps prevent 
further penetration of the tissue. Alkaline substances do not cause this barrier to be created which 
is less painful but also allows an alkaline burn to be more penetrating and possibly even more 
damaging. 

The generation of heat is the basis of the familiar rule of always adding acid to water, never the 
reverse. The generation of localized heat could cause the boiling of solutions or the spattering of 
the hot liquid. 

6.5 BROMINE ON THE SKIN;  

Flush with cold water as soon as possible and apply a compress saturated with a dilute thiosulfate 
solution. No other chemicals should be used either as a first aid or as a cleanup agent on the skin. 
Seek medical attention immediately. 

 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 27 of 32 

6.6 HYDROGEN FLUORIDE ON THE BODY OR IN THE AIR; 

Hydrogen fluoride is a very serious hazard. Both its gas and solutions are toxic, and it is rapidly 
absorbed through the skin and deep into the body tissues, causing long-term excruciating pain 
and burns that are slow to heal. Prompt removal of contaminated clothing while the injured 
person is being flushed with water under a safety shower is essential. Continuous flushing with 
cool water is vital until any whitening of the tissue has disappeared. Swath the injured person 
with soaking wet, iced cloths. Wrap to protect from shock and exposure. Get immediate medical 
help. Under no circumstances should ointments be applied. Although immediate pain is felt from 
the concentrated acid, action of the acid may be insidious, and contact with less concentrated 
solution may go unnoticed for hours. In all cases of body contact with hydrogen fluoride obtain 
medical aid. Simple flushing with water does not remove hydrogen fluoride deep in the tissues, 
and additional treatment is required. (Whenever hydrogen fluoride is being used, medical 
personnel likely to be involved in treating victims of exposure should be alerted to the need for 
preparation of the special treatment that is promptly required.) 

ALL HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SPILLS AND ACCIDENTS MUST BE REPORTED 
TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SAFETY. 

 

7. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES; 

7.1 WHEN AN EMERGENCY OCCURS; 

A. Report 

Report the nature and location of the emergency to the appropriate fire (9-911), police (7234), 
Health and Safety (5433 - days, 7234 - nights and weekends) , or medical facility; give your 
name, telephone number, building and floor number, and an estimate of the type and amount(s) 
of hazardous materials involved (if known). Tell where you will meet the emergency vehicle. If 
individuals are involved, report how many, whether they are unconscious, burned, or trapped; 
whether an explosion has occurred; and whether there has been a chemical or electrical fire. 

B. Notify  

Notify others in the area and your supervisor about the nature of the emergency. Do not forget to 
notify staff members such as janitors and secretaries. 

C. Wait for Response Personnel 

Meet the emergency crews at the place you indicated in 7.1.A above. Send someone else if you 
cannot go. 

D. Leave Communication Lines Open 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 28 of 32 

Do not make any other telephone calls unless they directly relate to the control of the emergency. 

7.2 DO WHAT IS NECESSARY TO PROTECT LIFE WHILE WAITING FOR 
ASSISTANCE. KEEP CALM ; 

A. Safeguard Injured Personnel 

Do not move any injured persons unless they are in further danger. Keep them warm. 
Unnecessary movement can severely complicate neck injuries and fractures. 

B. Remove Contamination if Possible 

If chemicals have been spilled on someone, get the individual under a shower or spigot to wash 
the affected area thoroughly. If chemicals are in the eyes, irrigate with plenty of cool water for at 
least 15 minutes. It is always a good idea to check for and remove any contact lenses before 
irrigation. However, contact lenses may be difficult to remove, and the irrigation must not be 
delayed. Seek immediate medical attention. 

C. Cover Injuries 

A blanket should be readily accessible for shock cases and for the protection of an injured person 
from exposure en route to medical aid. 

D. Assist Personnel 

If a person's clothing is on fire, douse the individual with water or wrap the person in a coat, 
blanket, or whatever is available to extinguish the fire, or roll the person on the floor, if 
necessary. Quickly remove any clothing contaminated with chemicals. Use caution when 
removing pullover shirts or sweaters to prevent contamination of the eyes. Douse with cool water 
to remove heat and place clean, wet, ice-packed cloths on burned areas. Wrap the injured person 
to avoid shock and exposure. Get medical attention promptly. 

E. Put Out Fires If Possible 

If there is a fire and there is little personal risk, use the proper extinguishers. If the fire is very 
small, it may be extinguished by smothering it with a nonflammable material such as an inverted 
beaker or watch glass. Fight the fire from a position of escape. Close fire doors. Do not use 
elevators to leave the building; use the stairs; and keep the lights on in your laboratory or work 
area. 

F. Get Everyone to Fresh Air 

Anyone overcome with smoke or fumes should be removed to uncontaminated air and treated for 
shock (provide oxygen inhalation, if possible). 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 29 of 32 

G. Find Out the Materials Involved 

If hazardous chemicals are ingested, encourage the victim to drink large amounts of water while 
en route to medical assistance. However, never give anything by mouth to an unconscious 
person. Attempt to learn exactly what substances were ingested and inform the medical staff 
(while the victim is en route, if possible). 

H. CPR and Resuscitation 

If the injured person is not breathing, provide mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. The following 
procedure is recommended: Place the person face up, clear the mouth of any obstruction, and 
loosen tight clothing. Lift the neck and tilt the head back, so the  
chin is pointing upward. Insert your thumb in the mouth, grasp the lower jaw, and lift it forcibly 
upward and forward. Pinch the nose and blow vigorously through the mouth to make the chest 
expand. Repeat every four to five seconds. If the victim's chest does not expand, recheck the 
mouth for any obstruction, tilt the head back farther, and resume blowing into the mouth. 

I. Control Bleeding 

If an individual is bleeding severely, control the bleeding by compressing the wound with a cloth 
or whatever is available. (WHENEVER ONE IS EXPOSED TO HUMAN BODILY FLUIDS, 
PRECAUTIONS MUST BE TAKEN TO PROTEST AGAINST POSSIBLE HIV OR HBV 
INFECTION, SEE UNIVERSITY BIOLOGICAL SAFETY MANUAL) Elevate the injury 
above the level of the heart. If blood is spurting, place a pad directly on the cut, apply firm 
pressure, wrap the injured person to avoid shock, and get immediate medical attention. In the 
case of a less severe cut, wash the cut and remove any pieces of glass, wrap the injured person to 
avoid shock (except in the case of a trivial cut), and get medical attention. A pressure pad may be 
applied firmly on the wound. Pressure points are tried before tourniquets. Tourniquets may be 
used by persons trained in first aid if the injury appears to be severe. Do not treat the cut 
yourself, not even to bandage it. Seek medical attention. 

J. Watch Out for Live Circuits 

Do not touch a person in contact with a live electrical circuit. DISCONNECT THE POWER 
FIRST OR YOU MAY BE SERIOUSLY INJURED. 

K. Leave the Area if Directed 

If you are directed to leave the room, promptly cease any additions of reagents or reactants, stop 
the experiment, turn off all burners or other energy-producing and energy-consuming devices (if 
practical), and immediately evacuate the area as directed. 

L. Report the Incident 

ALL ACCIDENTS INVOLVING CHEMICALS MUST BE REPORTED TO THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SAFETY. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 30 of 32 

APPENDIX; 
 
TABLE 1  

COMPATIBLE CHEMICALS 

A common practice is to store all chemical materials alphabetically. However, in order to prevent 
unwanted reactions from occurring in a storage area, chemicals should be stored in compatible 
groups. The table below indicates which materials may be safely stored together. Within a group, 
materials may be stored alphabetically. This list is not intended to cover all materials. Please call 
DHS at 5433 for detailed information on specific compounds. 

   
Chemical Group Reactivity Do Not Store With  
Name Group # Group #  

INORGANIC ACIDS 1 2-8,10,11,12,13,15-18,20,21 
ORGANIC ACIDS 2 1,3,4,7,13,15-18 
CAUSTICS 3 1,2,6-8,12-17,19,21 
AMINES AND ALKANOLAMINES 4 1,2,5,7,8,12-17,21 
HALOGENATED COMPOUNDS  5 1,3,4,11,13,16 
ALCOHOLS, GLYCOLS, GLYCOL Ethers  6 1,7,13,15,19,21 
ALDEHYDES  7 1-4,6,8,14-16,18,19,21 
KETONES 8 1,3,4,7,18,19 
PETROLEUM OILS,SATURATED 
HYDROCARBONS 9 19 

AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS 10 1,19 
OLEFINS 11 1,5,19 
ESTERS 12 1,3,4,18,19 
MONOMERS, POLYMERIZABLE Esters 13 1-6,14,15,18,19,20,21 
PHENOLS 14 3,4,7,13,15,18,19 
ALKYLENE OXIDES 15 1-4,6,7,13,14,16-18,21 
CYANOHYDRINS 16 1-5,7,15,18,21 
NITRILES 17 1-4,15,21 
AMMONIA 18 1,2,7,8,12-16,19,21 
HALOGENS 19 3,6-14,18,20 
ETHERS 20 1,13,19 
ACID ANHYDRIDES 21 1,3,4,6,7,13,15-18 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 31 of 32 

TABLE 2 

COMMON PEROXIDE FORMING MATERIALS  

 Explosive peroxides may form in the following materials : 
Acetal Cellosolve (2-Ethoxy Ethanol) 
Cumene Cyclohexadiene 
Cyclohexene Decahydronaphthalene 
Diacetylene Dicyclopentadiene 
Diethyl Ether Diethylene Glycol 
Dimethoxyethane Dimethyl Ether (Diglyme) 
Dioxane Divinyl Acetylene 
Ether (Glyme) Ethoxyethyl Acetate 
Ethylene Glycol Monoethyl Ether Isopropyl Ether 
Isopropyl Benzene Isopropyl Alcohol 
Methyl Acetylene Tetrahydrofuran 
Tetrahydronaphthalene Vinyl Benzene (Styrene) 
Vinyl Ethers Vinylidine Chloride 

Peroxides also form in the following chemical groups : 

DIENE ETHOXY METHOXY GLYME ISOPROPYL

This list does not cover all materials known to form peroxides, but should serve as a conservative 
guide to alert personnel to the types of materials which possess this capability. For additional 
information on peroxide formers contact the DHS.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 32 of 32 

TABLE 3 

FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS 

These are the maximum flammable liquids container sizes and required container materials for 
laboratories and for classrooms on the Oxford campus. Boiling Points (Bp) and Flash Points(Fp) 
are in Degrees Farenheit.  

     

Classification Fp Bp Container Requirements 
   Glass Metal Safety Can 
Flammable Liquids 
      

Class 1A Below 73 Below 100 1 Pint 1 Gallon 2 Gallons 
Class 1B Below 73 Above 100 1 Quart 5 Gallons 5 Gallons 
Class 1C 73 - 100 N.A. 1 Gallon 5 Gallons 5 Gallons 
Combustible Liquids 
      

Class 2 100 - 140 N.A. 1 Gallon 5 Gallons 5 Gallons 
Class 3 140 - 200 N.A. 1 Gallon 5 Gallons 5 Gallons 

N.A. = Not Applicable 

 


