
The University of Mississippi 

Employee Responsibilities 

Summary/Purpose: University employees have the responsibility to serve the University as 

they would serve any other efficient and progressive organization, and to give courteous service 

to students, faculty, staff and visitors on campus. Essential employee responsibilities and 

expectations (including but not limited to) are listed below. 

 

 The University has a great number of students, faculty, staff and visitors on campus. 
Many of them will form an opinion of the University based on how well they are received 

by office personnel.  A core value of the University is the right of every individual to be 

treated with dignity and respect at all times.  Therefore, the University strives to exceed 

expectations and to acknowledge that every experience is an opportunity to ensure a 

positive outcome.  Telephone and email courtesy is an important consideration.  The 

telephone response should indicate the department or office and the speaker's name, and 

it should be professional, courteous and alert.  Practice good email etiquette which 

includes manners, courtesy, and respect, with consideration given to the overall tone of 

the email. Please refer to the UM Style Guide for the University approved email signature 

format.  

 

 It is vital to the University for all employees to have reliable attendance.  Excessive 
unscheduled absenteeism and consistent tardiness negatively impact the University’s 

ability to effectively provide services.  Employees should be on time for work and notify 

the supervisor/department head in instances of tardiness or absence. 

 

 University computers/devices and time on the job are reserved for University-related 
business as approved by supervisors and in accordance with the IT Appropriate Use 

Policy.  Extensive use of time for matters not pertaining directly to employment is not 

good practice and ultimately causes criticism.  Employees should refrain from 

excessively using social media outlets (such as but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, 

Instagram, Snapchat, YouTube, etc.) while on work time.  This includes personal use of 

social media while at work by an employee (e.g. logging onto Facebook and providing 

personal updates to a Facebook page or Twitter account during work hours using their 

own or their agency’s information technology resources, when such activity is outside of 

the employee’s official job function). Employees are also discouraged from spending 

non-university related activities (such as knitting, gaming, reading, and personal sales) 

during work hours.  When there is an appreciable amount of time unoccupied by office 

duties, the position should be reduced to part time or the incumbent should be made 

available to give assistance to other departments. 

 

Related Policies:   

University Creed 

Code of Conduct & Ethics 

http://www.olemiss.edu/apps?appid=135&appParam=UM-Style-Guide-2014.pdf


Policy on Policies 

 


