
Page 1 of  1

The University of Mississippi

Refund Policies for Graduate Students

The following refund schedule will apply to those students who withdraw from school or change
from full-time to part-time enrollment. Students who withdraw from the University and reside in
student residence halls will be refunded rent on the same basis as fees. Any refund of fees,
residence hall rent, or Ole Miss Express will: 1. be applied to the appropriate Student Aid Source,
if the student was receiving financial aid; 2. relieve any debt owed by the student to the
University; and 3. the remaining balance will be forwarded to the withdrawn student. In case of
dismissal of student, no refund will be given.

Additional refund policies are stated below, and each student should be familiar with these
policies.

SCHEDULE FOR REFUNDS
Fall/Spring Full 1st/2nd

Computed from date classes begin Academic Summer Summer
(see Academic Calendar) Semester Session Term

For the first 10 days of class 100% — —
After the first 10 days of class 0% — —
For the first 6 days of class — 100% —
After the first 6 days of class — 0% —
For the first 3 days of class — — 100%
After the first 3 days of class — — 0%

The cancellation fee is applicable to students who withdraw during the 100-percent refund period.

Withdrawal from the University ! The effective date of withdrawal for refund purposes will be
the date of notification to withdraw. Such notification should be given to the registrar. When
notification is made by mail the postmark date of the letter may be considered as the date of
notification. If a student is readmitted to the University after withdrawal that same semester, the
student will be assessed only the amount previously refunded.

Committee on Refunds ! Students should petition if they feel they should receive refunds in
excess of standard tuition refunds due to extenuating circumstances such as death in the family,
serious illness, etc. Petitions with complete details of their situation should be sent to: Committee
on Refunds, The University of Mississippi, P.O. Box 1848, Office of the Bursar, University,
Mississippi 38677.


	Page 1

