
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Domain Name Policy 
 

Purpose 
 
This policy outlines the procedures related to domain name registration and the UM campus 
network. 

The Office of Information Technology (IT) has authority for all hostnames within the 
olemiss.edu domain. This includes managing the campus domain name service (DNS), 
registering IP addresses and hostnames for new network connections, coordinating network 
changes, assigning hostnames, creating subdomains, and coordinating with departmental 
systems/network administrators who have been delegated authority for their departmental 
subdomains. 

Related: IT Appropriate Use (https://olemiss.edu/aup) 

Domains for Servers Without a Public Website 
 

Example: 

A department is installing a new workstation under the name 
abc.dept.olemiss.edu which will be used within the department. 

 
Departmental system/network administrators may contact the IT Network Management Group 
at network@ts.olemiss.edu to have new subdomain names (e.g., abc.dept.olemiss.edu) added 
to the campus DNS. Requests for new, moved, removed, and converted connections, as well as 
questions about hostnames, IP addresses and the campus name servers, should also be 
directed here. Please note that this service is not available to student computers in residence 
halls.  

 
Domains for Public Websites 
Case 1: Mapping olemiss.edu subdomain to one of the campus Web servers 
 
Example: 

A department wants to use the domain dept.olemiss.edu for their 
website. 

http://www.olemiss.edu/depts/it/
https://olemiss.edu/aup
mailto:network@ts.olemiss.edu


The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

This usually occurs when the department’s website is not on the same server as the university’s 
main website (https://olemiss.edu). In order to map the “olemiss.edu” domain to a different 
server, a subdomain is needed. The choice of subdomain is negotiated between the 
department, Information Technology, and Communications so that it reflects the purpose of 
the site but is also convenient and communicates the intent as clearly as possible. The 
department should email its intentions to webmaster@olemiss.edu who will negotiate the 
necessary approvals from IT and Communications and will coordinate with Networking on the 
creation and destination of DNS entries. 

Case 2: Mapping a non olemiss.edu hostname to one of the university web servers  
 
Example:  

An organization wants to host its website on a web server in the Data 
Center using the domain www.abc.com or www.abc.org. 

Sometimes a research center or national agency that has close ties with the University of 
Mississippi needs some level of independence from the “olemiss.edu” brand for marketing 
reasons. In this case, the organization making this request is solely responsible for registering 
and maintaining the Internet domain name, and for all the associated fees. But first, the 
organization should seek approval of the domain name by emailing webmaster@olemiss.edu 
about their intentions. The webmaster will then negotiate approvals from Information 
Technology and Communications about whether the site should be hosted on a university web 
server and about the desired domain name. If the domain has already been in use but hosted 
elsewhere, the necessary approvals are still necessary before the site can be moved to 
university web servers. 

Case 3: Mapping an olemiss.edu domain to an off-campus web server 

Example:  

A vendor/service web site that is hosted in the cloud needs to brand 
itself as part of the university’s olemiss.edu domain. 

Services which are hosted off campus (e.g., https://box.olemiss.edu and 
https://connectu.olemiss.edu) may need to indicate that they are authorized services acting on 
behalf of the University of Mississippi. Some departments, too, may simply wish to host their 
sites off campus. Since the university owns the olemiss.edu domain, the approval of the Chief 
Information Officer must be granted for any service wishing to use it. The person in charge of 
the program should make the request via email to webmaster@olemiss.edu so the webmaster 
can coordinate these efforts. 

https://olemiss.edu/
mailto:webmaster@olemiss.edu
mailto:webmaster@olemiss.edu
https://box.olemiss.edu/
https://connectu.olemiss.edu/
mailto:webmaster@olemiss.edu

