
The University of Mississippi 
 
 

Medical Requirements for Registration 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To meet requirements established by the Mississippi State Department of 
Health and Institutions of Higher Learning for acceptance to the state university system. 
 
 
Domestic Student Requirements 
 
New students, including transfer students and employees who enroll to take classes, at  the 
University of Mississippi, whose birthday is after January 1, 1957, are required to submit proper 
documentation of immunizations. Proof of two doses of Measles, Mumps, and Rubella, usually in 
the form of MMR, is needed to register for courses.  Proof of immunity to Measles, Mumps, and 
Rubella should be submitted in one of the following ways:  A physician statement documenting 
prior infection/disease, blood test (Serology confirmation of immunity), or vaccine history 
(Immunization Compliance Form 121 or University of Mississippi compliance form.) 
 

1. Individuals born after January 1, 1957, are required to have two doses of Measles 
(Rubeola) after 12 months of age.  Immunizations must be repeated if given at less 
than 12 months of age, or before January 1, 1968.  There must be a minimum time 
interval of four weeks between the two doses of Measles. 

2. Also required is proof of two doses of Rubella vaccine that were administered after 
12 months of age and on/after January 1, 1969.  

3. Proof of two doses of Mumps vaccines also is required. 
 
Temporary waivers may be granted for students enrolled in distance learning courses and/or 
programs where their time on campus is limited to a minimum number of hours as determined by 
the admitting IHL institution.  These waivers are given on a semester by semester basis. 
 
 
International Student Requirements 
 
International students entering the University of Mississippi for the first time are required to have 
proof of all immunizations required of domestic students.  In addition, international students are 
required to have a chest x-ray and a blood test (interferon gamma release assay, i.e. IGRA) to 
screen for tuberculosis prior to the start of classes.  Chest x-rays from other countries are not 
accepted. 
 
 
Permanent and Temporary Exemptions 
 
The only permanent exemption to immunization requirements in the state of Mississippi is a 
medical exemption.  Medical exemption to specific vaccines must be documented on a 
Mississippi State Department of Health Form 122, or on the University of Mississippi Certificate  
 
 
 
 

 
 

Page 1 of 2 



of Compliance, found at healthcenter.olemiss.edu/health-requirements-and-forms/.  The medical 
exemption may be requested on this form by a licensed health care provider and must be based on 
a contraindication (reason not to give the vaccine) that is among those listed by the Mississippi 
State Department of Health.  The request is reviewed and, if accepted as legitimate by Student 
Health staff, the student will be exempt from the immunization. The Student Health Service staff 
only accepts contraindications to a particular vaccine that are recognized by ACIP or the 
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Disease.  Measles, Mumps, and 
Rubella vaccines are not required for females who are pregnant, suspect pregnancy, or nursing 
mothers.  A valid certificate of Medical Exemption from Immunization Requirements for Adults 
(Form 132), or a statement from an OB/GYN is required.  Vaccinations are exempt until 
pregnancy or nursing is resolved. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
      Revised 5/2016 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 2 


