
Page 1 of  2

The University of Mississippi

Admission to the University: Application Requirements

Admission to the University is administered under policies established by state law, the Board of
Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning, and the University’s faculty. Admission
requirements are subject to change without notice at the direction of the Board of Trustees.   The
Admissions Office (phone (662) 915-7226, FAX (662) 915-5869, e-mail
admissions@olemiss.edu) is responsible for administering the admissions process for
undergraduate students.  The Graduate School (phone (662) 915-7474, FAX (662) 915-7577, e-
mail gschool@olemiss.edu) is responsible for administering the admissions process for graduate
students.  The Law School (phone (662) 915-7361) is responsible for administering the
admissions process for law students. 

Applications ! Prospective students interested in undergraduate admission for the campuses in
Oxford, Southaven, and Tupelo are encouraged to apply online by going to
https://secure.olemiss.edu/services/appl_index.html. Those who may be unable to apply online
may print a copy from the Web site above or request a paper application from the Office of
Admissions, P.O. Box 1848, 145 Martindale, University, MS 38677-1848. Prospective students
interested in admission to the Graduate School may contact the dean of the Graduate School, The
University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, and may apply online by going to above web
address. Those students interested in admission to the School of Law may contact the Director of
Admissions, School of Law, The University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677. 

Application Deadlines ! Undergraduate and graduate applicants should submit all required
admission materials well in advance of the start of the term in which enrollment is sought.
Nonresidents of Mississippi applying for first-year undergraduate admission for the summer or
fall terms should mail complete application materials no later than April 1. Applications
postmarked after April 1 will be evaluated on a space-available basis, with special consideration
afforded applicants who stand to make exceptional scholastic and/or co-curricular contributions
to the campus community.

Applications may be accepted as early as one year before the start of the desired enrollment term.
It may not be possible to evaluate an application that is received later than 20 days prior to the
start of the term. Students who apply within 20 days of the start of the term may be required, if
admitted, to register after classes have begun and to pay associated late fees.

Application Fees ! Mississippi residents must pay a nonrefundable $35 application fee and
nonresidents of Mississippi must pay a $40 fee at the time of application. The fee is payable by
credit card with the online application. Students who have received a waiver of the charge for
taking the ACT or SAT may qualify for a waiver of the UM application fee by providing a copy
of the test fee waiver.

Off-campus Sites ! The University of Mississippi offers undergraduate classes at various
locations including Tupelo, Southaven, Jackson, and other sites. Degree credit earned at these

mailto:admissions@olemiss.edu
mailto:gschool@olemiss.edu


Page 2 of  2

locations will be treated as residence credit and appear on the student’s permanent academic
record. Students at off-campus sites must meet regular admission requirements and be accepted
for admission to the University.

Immunization Requirement ! The Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning,
in cooperation with the Mississippi State Board of Health, requires all entering students born
after January 1, 1957, to submit proof of two immunizations for measles and one for rubella prior
to registration. Immunizations must be given after one year of age. Forms for documenting
immunizations or establishing an exemption to the requirement are available from the Student
Health Service office and will be sent to students upon admission.


