
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 1 
 

Examinations and Last Week of Class 

 

Regulations Governing All Examinations • A student’s failure to appear for an examination 
without an acceptable excuse,inability to present valid identification,absence from the room 
during the course of an examination without the consent of the examiner, or attempting any 
portion of an examination without submitting his or her answers shall result in failure of the 
examination. Tardiness beyond 15 minutes forfeits a student’s right to an examination. 
 
Final Examinations • A final examination, to be given at the time posted in the examination 
schedule, is required in each undergraduate course, unless the appropriate chair and dean have 
approved an exception. A student who has three or four final examinations in one day may 
arrange with the course instructor to take the noon or 7:30 p.m. examination at another time. In 
order to give a final examination at any time other than that shown in the posted examination 
schedule, an instructor must have prior approval of the department chair and dean. 
 
Last Week of Class● The following guidelines exist to allow sufficient time for students and 
instructors to prepare for final examinations.  These guidelines apply to the week preceding final 
examinations for undergraduate courses held during Fall and Spring semesters. 
 
During the period of Wednesday through Friday of the last week of class, instructors are not to 
give exams, tests, or quizzes that contribute more than 10% of the final grade for a class. An 
instructor can obtain approval of the department chair and dean to give an exam, test, or quiz, of 
this weight, during this three day period. Instructors should return graded work and/or inform 
students of their grades on exams, tests, or quizzes prior to the beginning of finals week.   
 
Exceptions to the above statement are automatically made for lab-based courses, technical 
writing courses, seminar courses that assign a term paper, and senior design courses that assign a 
multi-faceted project in lieu of a final exam. Major projects of the above types, which contribute 
more than 10% of the final grade and which are due during this Last Week period, should be 
assigned in the syllabus at the beginning of the semester and any substantial change in the 
assignment should be made known to students before the drop deadline. 
 


