
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Biological Waste Identification 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Biological Waste Identification Policy details the definitions of 
Biohazardous, Medical, Infectious and Pathalogical Waste Materials.  
 
 
What is a Medical Waste? What is a Pathological Waste? 
 

Medical = Research / Testing - - - - Pathological = Classroom / Educational 
 
 
Medical/infectious waste means any waste generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or 
immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or 
testing of biologicals.  
 
(1) Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, including: Cultures from 
medical and pathological laboratories; cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and 
industrial laboratories; wastes from the production of biologicals; discarded live and attenuated 
vaccines; and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures.  
(2) Human pathological waste, including tissues, organs, and body parts and body fluids that are 
removed during surgery or autopsy, or other medical procedures, and specimens of body fluids 
and their containers.  
(3) Human blood and blood products including:  

• Liquid waste human blood;  
• Products of blood;  
• Items saturated and/or dripping with human blood; or  
• Items that were saturated and/or dripping with human blood that are now caked with 

dried human blood; including serum, plasma, and other blood components, and their 
containers, which were used or intended for use in either patient care, testing and 
laboratory analysis or the development of pharmaceuticals. Intravenous bags are also 
included in this category.  

(4) Sharps that have been used in animal or human patient care or treatment or in medical, 
research, or industrial laboratories, including hypodermic needles, syringes (with or without the 
attached needle), Pasteur pipettes, scalpel blades, blood vials, needles with attached tubing, and 
culture dishes (regardless of presence of infectious agents). Also included are other types of 
broken or unbroken glassware that were in contact with infectious agents, such as used slides and 
cover slips.  
(5) Animal waste including contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and bedding of animals 
that were known to have been exposed to infectious agents during research (including research in 
veterinary hospitals), production of biologicals or testing of pharmaceuticals.  
(6) Isolation wastes including biological waste and discarded materials contaminated with blood, 
excretions, exudates, or secretions from humans who are isolated to protect others from certain 
highly communicable diseases, or isolated animals known to be infected with highly 
communicable diseases.  
(7) Unused sharps including the following unused, discarded sharps: hypodermic needles, suture 
needles, syringes, and scalpel blades.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

Pathological waste means waste material consisting of only human or animal remains, 
anatomical parts, and/or tissue, the bags/containers used to collect and transport the waste 
material, and animal bedding (if applicable).  


