
The University of Mississippi 
 

Controlled Substances Testing of Employees with a Commercial 
Driver’s License  

 

Summary/Purpose: In compliance with the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991 
(OTETA), The University of Mississippi will conduct substances testing of all applicants for 
employment in positions requiring a commercial driver's license and current employees whose 
University employment requires them to possess a commercial driver's license.  
 
In compliance with the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991 (OTETA), The 
University of Mississippi will conduct substances testing of all applicants for employment in 
positions requiring a commercial driver's license and current employees whose University 
employment requires them to possess a commercial driver's license.  
 
Employees whose test results confirm prohibited alcohol concentration levels or the presence of a 
controlled substance as defined by OTETA will be subject to disciplinary action.  Any such 
disciplinary action shall, at a minimum, conform to those penalties proscribed by the applicable 
federal regulations, but may also include other disciplinary action, up to and including termination of 
employment.  The University will provide affected employees and their supervisors with alcohol and 
controlled substances information and train supervisors to determine reasonable suspicion of alcohol 
misuse/controlled substance use. University supervisors will also refer affected employees to the 
Employee Assistance Program.  Any costs for treatment, other than those covered by the State 
Employees' Health Insurance Plan, must be borne by the employee.  
 
Records of required test results and annual reports to the U. S. Department of Transportation will be 
submitted and maintained in the Department of Human Resources.   All records will be retained in a 
secure location with controlled access, as required by federal regulations.  
 
No centralized funding is provided for expenses related to required substance testing. The 
departments employing the affected individuals are responsible for ensuring related invoices are 
paid.  The Department of Human Resources serves as the liaison between University 
departments and the testing provider.    
 

Procedure  
 

1. Prior to beginning work in positions requiring a commercial driver's license, employees will 
be tested for controlled substance use. Offer letters to affected new employees shall indicate 
that the offer is contingent upon completion of drug tests which indicate an absence of drug 
use. Hiring departments will coordinate with the Department of Human Resources to 
schedule required tests. Any employee who tests positive for drugs will not be allowed to 
begin work and the offer of employment will be withdrawn unless documentation is provided 
by the employee to the University's Medical Review Officer to convince the Medical Review 



Officer that the presence of the drug is justified.  The individual will be informed by the 
Department of Human Resources of the positive drug screen.  Individuals may reapply for 
employment in a position requiring a commercial driver's license at the University after a 
reasonable time but additional drug screening will be administered at the individual's 
expense. In addition, if employed, those individuals will be administered follow-up tests, at 
their own expense, a minimum of six times over the first 12 months following their 
employment. 

 
2. After employment, and as a condition of University employment, employees required to have 

a commercial driver's license will be tested randomly; when there is reasonable suspicion; 
postaccident involving the loss of human life or the issuance of a citation for a moving traffic 
violation arising out of the accident; upon return to work after a violation of this policy; and, 
as a follow-up to ensure that the policy has not been violated again.  The Department of 
Human Resources will coordinate testing of employees.  

 
o Random tests for alcohol misuse/controlled substances use will be conducted 

utilizing a scientifically valid method to select employees for testing.  A minimum of 
25 percent of the drivers will be tested each calendar year for alcohol misuse and 50 
percent of the drivers will be tested each calendar year for controlled substances use.   
 

o Employees will be tested for alcohol/drug use when there is reasonable suspicion of 
their alcohol misuse/controlled substances use.  When reasonable suspicion exists, a 
written record must be made by the individual who made the observations and 
submitted to the Director of Human Resources.  Supervisors of employees subject to 
alcohol/drug testing are required to participate in at least one hour of training on 
alcohol misuse symptoms and indicators used in making determinations for 
reasonable suspicion testing and one hour training on the signs and symptoms of drug 
use. Training efforts will be coordinated by the Department of Human Resources.   

 
o Postaccident alcohol tests will be conducted within two hours following an accident 

involving loss of human life or resulting in a citation for a moving traffic violation. 
Drug tests will be conducted within 32 hours following an accident.  

 
o Employees who violate alcohol misuse/drug use rules will be tested and must be 

found in compliance with the rules prior to returning to work.  In addition, those 
employees will be administered follow-up tests a minimum of six times over the first 
12 months following his/her return to work.   

 
3. Positive test results will be reviewed by the University's Medical Review Officer who will 

notify the Department of Human Resources after all confirmation tests are complete.  The 
Director of Human Resources will review the individual circumstances with the employee's 
unit head and recommend disciplinary action to the appropriate administrator.   
 

4. Employees who refuse to submit to testing procedures when required will be forbidden            
to drive a University vehicle and will be subject to other appropriate disciplinary actions, up 
to and including termination of employment.  The employee's unit head and the Director of 
Human Resources will review the individual circumstances and recommend disciplinary 
action to the appropriate administrator(s).  



 
5. If an employee is required to participate in a counseling/treatment program, the  employee 

may utilize accrued Major Medical Leave, Personal Leave, or leave without pay to 
reasonably accommodate such participation.  

 
6. Employees subject to testing required by this policy will be provided detailed  information 

about alcohol misuse/drug use, the University's testing policy, and how and where they can 
get help for alcohol misuse/drug use. 

 


