
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  1.2 Satisfactory Academic Progress 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies and 

procedures for Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP). 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply with 

administrative and regulatory requirements. 

 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

1.2   Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) Overview 

1.2.1   Undergraduate Students 

 1.2.2  Graduate Students (non-Law, non-Pharmacy) 

 1.2.3  Law Students 

 1.2.4  Pharmacy Students 

1.2.5 Special Considerations 

 1.2.6  SAP Review Procedure 

 1.2.7  SAP Appeals Procedure 

 1.2.8  Information for Students and Parents 

 1.2.9  Instructions for Appealing Financial Aid Suspension 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 GPA – Grade Point Average 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 SAP – Satisfactory Academic Progress 

UM – University of Mississippi 

  



 

Part 1.2 Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) Overview 

 
 
All students at UM must achieve and maintain SAP in order to retain Title IV aid eligibility as 

directed by the U.S. Department of Education. 

 

 SAP is checked at the end of each spring term. Students failing to meet academic 
progress standards are placed on financial aid suspension beginning with the 

summer/fall term (whichever is applicable).  

 

 Students placed on financial aid suspension are ineligible to receive any federal student 
aid funds.  The suspension also applies to some institutional funds (the Sumners Grant, 

Health Professions Loan, Johnson Civil Engineering Loan, Noyce Teachers for a New 

Tomorrow Forgivable Loan Program, and McKinstry loan funds).  This policy applies 

to both undergraduate and graduate/professional students. 

 

 Students placed on financial aid suspension will be notified of said suspension by email 
at the student’s Ole Miss email address. 

 

 University aid programs and state aid programs as well as other scholarships may have 
differing requirements for continued eligibility.  

 

If a student leaves or is asked to leave the University of Mississippi for any reason and the student 

is on financial aid suspension, the student still will be on financial suspension when he/she returns. 

 

For purposes of SAP, a separate federal GPA is calculated that may differ from the resident UM 

GPA, because forgiveness grades, exclusion grades, and Academic Restart courses (see section 

1.2.5) cannot be excluded from the federal GPA calculation. Students must meet federal GPA 

requirements to qualify for federal aid eligibility. This also applies to the two-thirds rule and 

completion rates requirements (see sections 1.2.1 to 1.2.4). 

 

 

Correspondence: 

 

Please note that all correspondence from the OFA will be carried out through email. Therefore, the 

student is responsible for checking his or her Ole Miss email account regularly. If the student does 

not use their Ole Miss account, it is recommended that he or she forward it to an active email 

account. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Part 1.2.1 Undergraduate Students 

 
 
The following standards that are used to measure satisfactory academic progress for undergraduate 

students at UM: 

 

Standard One: Minimum GPA Requirement 

 

An undergraduate student must achieve and maintain the minimum cumulative resident 

federal GPA of 2.00 in his/her course of study at UM. This GPA does NOT include transfer 

work. 

 

 

Standard Two: The Two-Third’s Rule 

 

An undergraduate student must be passing at least 67% of the hours that he/she has 

attempted at UM. 

 

The Two-Third’s Rule formula is as follows: 

 

Cumulative resident credit hours earned 

Cumulative resident credit hours attempted 

 

 

Standard Three: Undergraduate Completion Rate 

 

An undergraduate student's total number of hours attempted at UM and all other 

institutions (including attempted hours gained in pursuit of prior undergraduate degrees or 

attempted hours gained in prior declared majors) cannot equal or exceed 180 hours. 

 

 

If a student changes majors, all previous courses taken at the undergraduate degree level are still 

counted in all SAP calculations. 

 

 

 

 

  



 

Part 1.2.2 Graduate Students (non-Law, non-Pharmacy) 

 
 
The following standards that are used to measure satisfactory academic progress for graduate 

students at UM: 

 

Standard One: Minimum GPA Requirement 

  

Graduate students must achieve and maintain a 3.00 cumulative GPA. The cumulative 

resident federal GPA is based on course work at UM only. 

 

 

Standard Two:  The Two-Third’s Rule 

 

Graduate students must pass at least 67% of the hours attempted at UM. 

 

The Two-Third’s Rule formula is as follows: 

 

Cumulative resident credit hours earned 

Cumulative resident credit hours attempted 

 

 

Standard Three:  Graduate Completion Rate: 

 

Graduate students will not be eligible to receive aid once they have attempted 72 total 

hours in pursuit of a Master’s degree, 100 hours in pursuit of a Specialist degree, or a grand 

total of 160 hours in pursuit of all graduate degrees, including Doctorate. 

 
 

If a student changes majors, all previous courses taken at the graduate degree level are still counted 

in all SAP calculations. 

  



 

Part 1.2.3 Law Students 

 
 
The following standards are used to measure satisfactory academic progress for Law students at 

UM: 

 

 

Standard One: Minimum GPA Requirement 

 

Law Students must achieve and maintain a cumulative resident federal GPA of 2.00.  (The 

cumulative GPA is based on course work at UM only.) 

 

 

Standard Two: The Two-Third’s Rule 

 

Law students must pass at least 67% of the hours attempted at UM. 

 

The Two-Third’s Rule formula is as follows: 

 

Cumulative resident credit hours earned 

Cumulative resident credit hours attempted 

 

 

Standard Three:  Law Completion Rate: 

 

Law students are no longer eligible to receive aid once they have attempted 120 total credit 

hours.   

 

Hours are based on the combined total law hours at UM and other institutions.  

 
 

 
 
 
 
  



 

Part 1.2.4 Pharmacy Students 

 
The following are standards used to measure satisfactory academic progress for pharmacy students 

at UM: 

 
EE 1-3 and PY1 Students: For students classified as Pharmacy, Early Entry (EE 1-3), and 

Professional Year 1 (PY1), in the B.S. in Pharmaceutical Sciences degree program, SAP is defined 

by the same standards applicable to other UM undergraduate students (see section 1.2.1). 

 

PY2-PY4 Students: Students enrolled in the Doctor of Pharmacy program (PY2-PY4) must meet 

the following four standards in order to be eligible for Title IV student aid:  

 

 

Standard One: Minimum GPA Requirement 

 

The student must maintain a minimum cumulative resident federal GPA of 2.0 on courses 

designated as required for PY2, PY3, and PY4 students. 

 

 

Standard Two: The Two-Third’s Rule 

 

PY2-4 students must pass at least 67% of the hours attempted at UM. 

 

The Two-Third’s Rule formula is as follows: 

 

Cumulative resident credit hours earned 

Cumulative resident credit hours attempted 

 

 

Standard Three: Pharmacy Completion Rate 

 

The student's total number of hours attempted as a PY2, PY3 and PY4 cannot exceed 174 

credit hours. 

 

 

Standard Four:  Passing Required Courses  

 

The student must receive no letter grade below “C” in any individual, required course (see 

the list below): 

  



 
  

PY2 Courses PY3 Courses PY4 Courses 

PHCY 501 PRCT 543 AMBC 591 

PHCY 502 PRCT 544 ASSN 591 

PHCY 503 PRCT 545 BARI 591 

PHCY 504 PRCT 552 BIOT 591 

PHCY 505 PRCT 555 CARD 591 

PHCY 506 PRCT 556 COMM 591 

PHCY 507 PRCT 557 CRIT 591 

PHCY 508 PRCT 558 DINF 591 

PHCY 509 PRCT 559 EMER 591 

PHCY 510 PRCT 560 GERA 591 

PHCY 550 PRCT 561 HOME 591 

PHCY 560 PRCT 562 INAD 591 

PHCY 561 PRCT 563 INDY 591 

 PRCT 564 INFD 591 

 PRCT 565 INFO 591 

 PRCT 569 INOP 591 

 PRCT 577 LEAD 591 

  MANC 591 

  MEDC 591 

  MGMT 591 

  NEON 591 

  NEUR 591 

  NUCL 591 

  NUTR 591 

  ONCL 591 

  PEDG 591 

  PAIN 591 

  PEDS 591 

  PKIN 591 

  POIS 591 

  PMTM 591 

  PRCT 553 

  PRCT 554 

  PRCT 566 

  PRCT 567 

  PRCT 586 

  PRCT 587 

  PRCT 591 

  PRCT 592 

  PRCT 593 

  PSYC 591 

  PUBH 591 

  RSCH 591 

  SURG 591 

  TRAN 591 

  VETP 591 

  WOMH 591 

  SBOP 591 



 

 
Special rules apply to courses with the statuses below in regard to determining enrollment level 

and SAP. 

 

Incomplete (I), Withdrawal (W), Credit Granted (Z), Passing (P), and Audited Course (X) 

Grades: 

 

The table below demonstrates how various grades are treated in the SAP calculations (the 

“standards” indicated in Sections 1.2.1 to 1.2.4): 

 

*If a course with an “I” grade is never completed, the grade will be changed to an “F” by the 

Registrar’s Office, which would then affect SAP GPA calculations. When probation reviews are 

completed, “I” grades will be calculatred as “F” grades in order to determine whether probation 

terms have been met. Upon notification of the grade change, OFA will review the student’s terms 

again. 

 

**The OFA determines whether or not a student is an unofficial withdrawal (see Unofficial 

Withdrawal Policy). Unofficial withdrawals impact the student’s GPA, the completion rate, and 

the two-third’s rule. 

 

Failed Courses (F Grades): 
 

There are three designations for “F” grades (Earned, Abandonment, No Attendance): 

 

 Earned F – The student “finished” the class.  It confirms that the student is not a 

withdrawal.  This F counts in SAP calculations and can impact the student’s resident 

federal GPA, the two-third’s rule, and completion rate.   

 

 Abandonment F - The student did have attendance confirmed in the course at least one 

time, but they did not finish the class.  This F is relevant to the identification of unofficial 

withdrawals.  It will be included in SAP and can impact the resident federal GPA, two-

third’s rule, and completion rate.   

Part 1.2.5 Special Considerations 

Grade 

Included in Attempted 

Hours (used to calculate the 

2/3’s rule and completion 

rate) 

Included in Earned 

Hours (used to calculate 

2/3’s rule) 

Included in Graded 

Hours (used to calculate 

Federal Resident GPA) 

I* Yes No No 

W** Yes No No 

Z Yes Yes No 

P Yes Yes No 

X No No No 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647757&accessPara=full
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647757&accessPara=full


 

 No Attendance F (or No-Show F) - No attendance was ever confirmed for this course.   

This status is relevant to the identification of a No-Show student (if all of his/her courses 

have this type of F).  This type of F will be excluded from all SAP determinations.   

 

At the end of a term, instructors may choose either an Earned or Abandonment F.  If any F grade 

has been entered and there is no confirmed attendance, the Registrar’s Office will change the F to a 

No Attendance F grade. 

 

Course Repetitions:  

 

A course can be repeated over and over (and can be included in the student’s enrollment level for 

determining financial aid eligibility) if the student keeps getting F’s, because the federal 

philosophy allows the student to keep trying to pass the course.   

 

However, once a course is passed (i.e., with at least a “D” grade), then a limit on repeating the 

course is imposed.  Students can receive federal student aid for a repeated, passed course ONE 

additional time (regardless of whether the academic major requires the student to retake the course 

to obtain a better grade*). Therefore, repeated coursework beyond this threshold will not be 

counted towards a student’s enrollment level for federal aid eligibility; it will be ignored.   

 

Repeated coursework is included in the calculations of the student’s federal GPA, completion rate, 

and the two-thirds measure, for SAP purposes.  

 

*NOTE:  If a student is required by the academic program to retake a course multiple times, but 

the course subject material is different in each repetition, then the academic department must 

submit a letter to OFA confirming this requirement. OFA has compiled a list of these courses over 

time and has implemented programming code that allows these courses to count towards 

enrollment for federal aid eligibility purposes if eligible. 

 

 

Remedial Courses: 

 

Up to one year (30 semester hours) of remedial courses (Developmental Studies “DS” classes) can 

be counted in a student’s enrollment for purposes of the receipt of federal aid.  

 

 

Non-Credit Courses: 

 

Non-credit courses do NOT count towards a student’s enrollment level for federal aid eligibility 

purposes, and are also not included in SAP calculations of the resident GPA or completion rate. 

 

 

  



Academic Restart, Forgiveness, and Exclusion: 

Neither being allowed to return to the University by the Office of the Registrar nor admittance to 

the University by the “Academic Restart” program will change the student’s financial aid 

eligibility status.  

 

Grades removed from a student’s transcript and GPA calculation by “Academic Restart” or the 

“Forgiveness” or “Exclusion” options are still considered in GPA calculations for federal student 

aid eligibility purposes. 

 

NOTE:  Academic Forgiveness and Exclusion applies only to undergraduates, and Academic 

Restart applies only to undergraduate and Law students. 

 

 

Transfer Credits: 
 

Credit hours from another institution that count toward the student’s educational program and are 

accepted by UM are counted as earned credit hours.  Transfer grades, however, are not included in 

the institution’s calculation of a GPA for graduation purposes. 

 

For Federal Title IV aid purposes: 

 Transfer credit hours count towards the student’s completion rate. 

 These credit hours do not count towards the SAP two-third’s rule. 

 Neither the cumulative resident (UM) GPA nor the cumulative resident GPA for Title IV 
aid purposes (which does not include forgiven grades) includes transfer work. 

 

 

Pursuit of a Second Degree: 

 

Students pursing a second degree of the same type are eligible to receive Federal Title IV aid (not 

including the Pell Grant), to the extent that they are eligible, as long as they meet the 

aforementioned applicable Satisfactory Academic Progress standards. Otherwise, students are able 

to go through the financial aid written and in-person appeal processes for consideration, unless all 

options have already been exhausted. 

 

Summer Terms: 

 

A student who is placed on financial aid suspension at the end of a spring term and plans on 

enrolling in summer courses may submit a financial aid appeal for consideration. If approved, the 

student will be placed on financial aid probation for the duration of the entire summer term even if 

only enrolled in one mini-session (i.e. May Intersession, First Summer, Full Summer, Second 

Summer, or August Intersession).  The student’s grades will again be reviewed at the end of the 

summer term. 

 

 

 



English as Second Language (ESL) Courses: 

 

At UM, ESL courses are part of the Intensive English Program (IEP).  These courses are graded, 

and count as part of a degree-seeking student’s course-load in SAP calculations, although most 

participants in IEP (i.e., international students who are not U.S. citizens nor eligible non-citizens) 

are not eligible for federal financial aid. 

 

 

Part 1.2.6 SAP Review Procedure 

 
At the end of the Spring term, a report is run of student academic performance to determine 

whether all required SAP standards have been met.  If not, the student is flagged for Financial Aid 

Suspension.  Awarding and disbursement holds are then set for federal aid purposes.   

 

If a student successfully appeals for reinstatement of aid, they are given probationary terms. 

Probationary students are reviewed at the end of each applicable term. 

 

 

Part 1.2.7 SAP Appeals Procedure 

 
The SAP Appeal is different from both a scholarship appeal and an Academic Standing Appeal. If 

a student has been academically dismissed or placed on academic suspension and wishes to appeal 

that status, the student should contact the Office of the Registrar for instructions.  A student placed 

on financial aid suspension who submits and is approved for an SAP appeal will NOT 

automatically correct that student’s academic standing.  Likewise, being readmitted through the 

Office of the Registrar will NOT necessarily remedy a student’s financial aid suspension status.   

 

Students who fail to maintain SAP may submit an appeal online to the OFA and will be required to 

provide the specific reasons that caused the student to fall below the University’s minimum 

academic standards. 

 

 Students may appeal the status of their financial aid in the event of an injury or illness, the 
death of a relative, or other special circumstances. 

 

 Students who are submitting appeals due to exceeding the threshold for overall attempted 
hours must submit an Academic Plan Confirmation Form that provides a target expected 

graduation date and an academic enrollment plan, detailing the remaining classes required 

for the desired degree. This information must be confirmed by the individual department’s 

Office of the Dean before an appeal decision is made.  Students submitting appeals with a 

target graduation date and academic plan exceeding a one-year timeframe will not be 

considered for an appeal. 

 

The OFA publicizes deadlines for submitting appeals each term. Students may access this 

information on the OFA website (finaid.olemiss.edu) by selecting “Quick Links”, then “Financial 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/
http://finaid.olemiss.edu/financial-aid-appeals/


Aid Appeals.” From there, students would select “Submit an Online Appeal,” then log in to the 

myOleMiss portal.  Date information will be provided on the instructions page.                        

 

Students may also access the SAP appeal through the myOleMiss portal by logging in to 

myOleMiss, then selecting the “Student” tab, then “Financial Aid” app list, then “Financial Aid 

Appeal Form.” Date information will be provided on the instructions page.                        

 

Financial aid suspension appeal decisions will be sent to the student’s Ole Miss email address.  

 

Students whose written appeal is approved are placed on financial aid probation and are expected 

to meet certain enrollment and GPA requirements during that term. They are also allowed to 

receive federal student aid for that one term while in probation status, to the extent that they are 

eligible. Students are expected to meet their assigned probation terms in order to receive aid for the 

next period of enrollment. Should a student meet satisfactory academic progress standards (see 

section 1.2.1) at the end of the term in question, then he/she will be set to satisfactory standing. 

 

A student whose written appeal has been denied may resubmit an appeal to include additional 

information per request of OFA request only. Otherwise, the student may request an in-person 

appeal to petition for a probationary term.  Although there is not a set limit on the number of 

semesters in which a written appeal may be submitted, only one in-person appeal is allowed per 

student, per degree level (Bachelor’s, Master’s, PhD, etc.) 

 

Should a student’s in-person appeal be approved, probation terms will be assigned as they are for 

an approved written appeal. 

 

Should a student’s in-person appeal be denied, then the student will not be eligible for federal aid 

until he/she meets the satisfactory academic progress standards (see section 1.2.1).  A student may 

also choose to submit subsequent written appeals for consideration once he/she has demonstrated 

significant academic improvement without receiving federal aid. 

 

The credit hours enrolled in and the GPA earned during a term in which the student does not 

receive Title IV will still be taken into consideration when determining whether or not the student 

is meeting satisfactory academic progress standards in the future. 

 

Students on financial aid probation will have their terms reviewed immediately upon final grade 

posting at the end of each term and will be notified of the outcome of their probation by email at 

the Ole Miss email address. Any student that met established  probation terms for a certain 

semester, but is not considered to be meeting all three satisfactory academic progress standards, is 

continued on probation. If probation terms need to be amended due to the student planning to take 

less hours than indicated in terms provided, the student must notify OFA of the request in writing 

prior to the semester’s mandatory drop date (see academic calendar) to review their probation 

terms.  If not planning to enroll in the semester for which probation terms have been assigned,  the 

student must submit a new appeal for a subsequent term for consideration. 

 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/financial-aid-appeals/


Students denied aid for failure to meet these SAP requirements, or students who have exhausted 

their appeal options, may still have the opportunity to regain eligibility once they meet the 

requirements. 

 

Important: It is the student’s responsibility to submit his/her financial aid appeals to the OFA. 

The OFA is not required to initiate the appeals process.  

 

 

Part 1.2.8 Instructions for Appealing Financial Aid Suspension 

The Instructions for Appealing Financial Aid Suspension are provided once the student accesses 

the financial aid appeal form through myOleMiss (as described in section 1.2.7); see below: 
 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPEALING FINANCIAL AID SUSPENSION 

These instructions are for the use of students who have been placed on Financial Aid Suspension and 

thereby are no longer eligible to receive financial aid or students who did not meet the terms and 

conditions of their scholarship. By following the steps outlined below, a student may appeal his or her 

placement on Financial Aid Suspension or loss of scholarship. 
 

A link to the standards for Satisfactory Academic Progress was included with the letter you received 

notifying you of your suspension. Email sent to you notifying you of your suspension. If you would like 

to review those standards at this time, you may visit our web site at http://finaid.olemiss.edu/financial-

aid-terms-and-conditions/. 
 

You were placed on Financial Aid Suspension because you failed to meet the Office of Financial Aid’s 

standards for Satisfactory Academic Progress. Federal regulations and the regulations governing many 

other forms of student aid require that a student meet a minimum academic standard in order to 

continue to receive student financial aid. 
 

A financial aid administrator may make exceptions to that requirement in individual cases, if the student 

can demonstrate that his or her failure to meet the minimum standard was caused by illness or injury, 

the death of a relative, or other special circumstances which are not expected to hinder academic 

success in a subsequent term. 
 

If you wish to appeal the suspension of your student financial aid or loss of scholarship, please answer 

carefully the following questions. A successful appeal will contain answers to each question or request 

for data, be well written, and provide evidence of your situation which will support your petition for 

reinstatement. Approval/Denial decision for appeals will be communicated to the student by e-mail. 
 

If your appeal is successful, you will be placed on Financial Aid Probation and given certain conditions 

that you must fulfill in order to continue to receive student financial aid. You will be informed of these 

conditions by e-mail. 
 

NOTE : If you have been academically dismissed or placed on academic suspension and wish to appeal 

that status, you should contact the Office of Admissions and Records for instructions. Completing an 

appeal of Financial Aid Suspension will not correct your academic standing. Likewise, being 

readmitted through the Office of Admissions and Records will not automatically remedy your Financial 

Aid Suspension. 

Following is a sample of the online Financial Aid Appeal Form: 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/financial-aid-terms-and-conditions/
http://finaid.olemiss.edu/financial-aid-terms-and-conditions/


 

 
 

 



 

Following is a sample of the in-person Financial Aid Appeal Form: 



 



 



 


