
The University of Mississippi 

 

Filming Motion Pictures or Television Productions 

 
Summary/Purpose: Procedure for authorization to use University facilities, buildings, images, 

and/or people in film or videotape productions. 

 

General 

 Requests to use the campus (including property, buildings or facilities) as a location for 

 filming/videotaping motion pictures and commercial television productions, as well as 

 news reports that require access to non-public areas, shall be submitted to the University 

 Communications office for consideration on a case by case basis. 

 

 The safety of students, faculty, and staff; the potential for damage to buildings facilities, 

 or property; the potential for disruption of academic and administrative programs or other 

 scheduled activities; and the subject matter of the production will be of primary 

 consideration in determining whether to grant a filming request. Particular attention will 

 be given to the way in which the University is portrayed. 

 

1. Use of Facilities 
 University buildings, statuary, or landmarks may not be used in any commercial 

 advertisement in a way that suggests the university’s involvement with, or support, 

 promotion, or endorsement of any product or service without the approval of the 

 chancellor. 

 

 The production company must provide a policy of comprehensive general liability and 

 property damage insurance. The scope and limits of coverage shall be determined by the 

 university attorney based on the nature and extent of activities to be conducted and the 

 facilities to be used in the filming. 

 

 A use fee will be established in each case based on the nature and extent of the 

 production activities, to include all costs incurred by University Police, the Physical Plant 

 department, or other university departments. 

 

2. Use of University Images, Symbols, and Identification Marks 
 The use of all registered marks, logos, licensed music, landmarks, and other images that 

 may be reasonably identified with the University of Mississippi in connection with 

 filming and/or videotaping will be reviewed by University Communications to ensure 

 they do not reflect unfavorably on the university. 

 

3. Approval of Content 
The script, or the topic and format for an unscripted production, and changes to the script, 

 must be approved by University Communications. 

 

4. Review and Oversight 



 Any request that is not resolved by University Communications shall be referred to the    

 Office of the Chancellor and the University Attorney who will determine whether to 

 grant the filming request. 


