
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  14.0 University Scholarship Appeal 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for University Scholarship Appeal. 

 

Disclaimer:    This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

  

 

Part 14.0 Overview  

 
Scholarships awarded by the Office of Financial Aid have various terms and conditions 
that must be met in order to retain eligibility. If a student fails to meet the stated terms 
and conditions, he/she may submit a Scholarship Appeal. The appeal should cite any 
special or mitigating circumstances he/she believes should be considered.  
 
There are two primary ways for students to access the Scholarship Appeal Form: 

 

 From the OFA website (finaid.olemiss.edu):  Students must select “Quick Links”, 
the “Financial Aid Appeals.” From there, students would select “Submit an 

Online Appeal,” then log in to the myOleMiss portal.  Once logged in, the 

student will encounter the “Instructions for Appealing Financial Aid Suspension” 

page. By clicking the “Next” button, the student will have accessed the Financial 

Aid Appeal Form, and should then select the appeal for “Scholarship”.  

 

 From the myOleMiss portal:  Students must log in, then select the “Student” tab, 
then “Financial Aid” app list, then “Financial Aid Appeal Form.” The student 

will encounter the “Instructions for Appealing Financial Aid Suspension” page. 

By clicking the “Next” button, the student will have accessed the Financial Aid 

Appeal Form, and should then select the appeal for “Scholarship”. 

 
Once submitted, the Scholarship Appeal will be reviewed by the Scholarship Committee. 
If the Scholarship Appeal is successful, the student is placed on scholarship probation and 
allowed to receive the scholarship for one semester. Notification of a successful appeal 
will include academic requirements that must be met to receive the scholarship beyond 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/
http://finaid.olemiss.edu/financial-aid-appeals/


the probation semester. If the Scholarship Appeal is denied, the scholarship will not be 
reinstated. 
 

The Scholarship Appeal is different from the Satisfactory Academic Progress Appeal. If 

required, the student should choose appeal for “both Scholarship and Financial Aid 

Suspension” (refer to policy 1.2 Satisfactory Academic Progress). 

 

Deadlines to submit an appeal each semester are determined by the Office of Financial 

Aid.  Students are notified of the deadline through their Ole Miss Email and the deadline 

is listed on the Financial Aid Appeal website.  

 

Note: Scholarships awarded on the basis of specific majors may have differing 

requirements.  Students should consult with their academic department for guidance.  
 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647754

