
The University of Mississippi 

Credit by Examination 

A student may be granted college level credit for the following types of learning, examinations, or 

experiences. The total number of hours one may earn through credit-by-examination (Advanced 
Placement (AP), Cambridge International, College Level Examination Program (CLEP), International 
Baccalaureate, Advanced Standing Exams, and military credit) is no more than half of the total hours 
required for the degree program. The grade of Z is granted for these courses, which count as transfer 
credit. The credits will be posted to a student’s academic record upon enrollment.

Tables of information about credit by examination for Advanced Placement (AP), Cambridge 
International, College Level Examination Program (CLEP), and International Baccalaureate are located in 
the online catalog: http://catalog.olemiss.edu/academics/regulations/credit/by-exam.

Advanced Standing Examination • An advanced standing examination is taken by a student who has had 
the equivalent of a UM course content.  A student enrolled in the advanced course who is approved to take 
an examination for credit should be given the examination prior to the beginning of the semester or no 
later than the last day to add classes as published in the academic calendar during the term in which the 
student enrolls.  Students who previously completed the same course at UM are not eligible for this credit.  
Students may attempt an advanced standing examination in a given course only one time and there is no 
appeal process.  

An Application for Advanced Standing Examination form, provided by the registrar, must be 
approved by the instructor and department chair of the course, the dean of the course, and the 
student's academic dean (if different).  A fee is assessed for an advanced standing examination.  

Placement Examination - Some departments may provide an examination for student placement in a 
more advanced course.  In these instances, the student would not receive credit through the placement 
examination.  Student need approval from the departmental chairperson, who will arrange the 
examination.  

Credit for Educational Experiences in the Armed Forces • Credit toward a degree may be granted to 
those students who submit to the Office of Admissions a certified copy of either D.D. Form 295 or D.D. 
Form 214, which indicates an honorable discharge and a period of continuous active duty for at least 90 
days. Four semester hours in one of the university ROTC programs, or as physical education or elective 
credit, will be granted for basic training or its equivalent. Upon successful completion of 18 months with 
the Army National Guard/Active Army Reserve, an additional 6 hours will be awarded in the Army 
ROTC program. An additional 12 semester hours of credit in one of the ROTC programs may be granted 
to students who earned a commission while in service. Additional credit for training in formal service 
schools will be granted on the basis of recommendations published in A GUIDE TO THE EVALUATION 
OF EDUCATIONAL EXPERIENCES IN THE ARMED SERVICES or the recommendations of the 
Commission on Accreditation of Service Experiences to the extent that the recommended credit can be 
evaluated as equivalent to a specific university course. The maximum credit allowed from these sources is 
40 semester hours. 

Credit also may be granted for correspondence courses completed through a United States Armed Forces 
Institute program up to the maximum of 33 semester hours for credit from all correspondence courses. 
Credit is not granted for correspondence courses administered by the armed services. 




