
 

 

The University of Mississippi 

Graduate School Admission Standards and Application Procedures 
 

Admission Standards - Admission to the Graduate School is determined by the Dean of the 

Graduate School after evaluation and approval of credentials and recommendation by the faculty 

of the academic discipline concerned. The Graduate School at The University of Mississippi 

recognizes the necessity of using multiple criteria in making admission decisions. These criteria 

include an applicant’s previous academic performance and scores on standardized tests and may 

include research and practical experiences, evidence of skill (e.g., a writing sample), letters of 

recommendation, and, in the case of applicants whose native language is not English, scores on 

an English proficiency exam. Students may apply for admission before a baccalaureate degree is 

completed but may not enroll as a graduate student until the degree is conferred. Meeting 

minimum standards does not guarantee admission to a degree program. The selection process is 

competitive, and admission decisions take into consideration the availability of space and 

resources within a department. To assure full consideration for admission, all application 

materials must be received by deadline dates. 

 

In order to be assured of consideration for admission, the following materials must be submitted 

to the Graduate School prior to April 1 for Summer and Fall enrollment and prior to October 1 

for Spring enrollment; an application for Graduate School must include an on-line application, 

official transcripts from all institutions attended, and appropriate test scores. 

 

An incomplete application will not be reviewed by the intended graduate program. Some 

departments enforce individual application deadlines. Applicants are urged to contact the 

department to which they are applying regarding departmental requirements and deadlines. 

 

Application Procedures - Applications for admission to the Graduate School must be 

completed by the deadlines noted above. Incomplete applications will be held for one year. 

Beyond that time, the application process, including submission of a new application fee, must 

begin again. An application is complete when the following materials have been received: 

 

1. A completed on-line application, including payment of the application fee. 

 

2. An official score from an appropriate standardized test when required by the program. 

International applicants whose primary language is not English and/or who have completed their 

secondary or tertiary education primarily outside of the U.S. must submit scores on an approved 

English language proficiency exam. Submission of this test result is required at the time of 

application. Other materials may be required by specific departments. 

 

3. Official transcripts from the institution conferring the baccalaureate degree and from all 

colleges and universities subsequently attended. Only transcripts submitted directly from the 

sending institution to the University of Mississippi are considered official. 

 

4. Proof of immunization. All application materials should be sent to the Graduate School. 

Applicants failing to provide any of the materials noted above will not be considered for 

admission. Medical and immunization records must be submitted to Student Health. 



 

 

Re-Admission - University of Mississippi students who have a break in enrollment of one or 

more semesters must apply for re-admission. Official transcripts must be requested by the 

student and received by the Graduate School from all institutions attended since the last 

University of Mississippi enrollment. Students are admitted for a particular semester. If they are 

unable to enroll in courses that semester, they may request that their application be considered 

for the next semester. Re-admitted students will be subject to departmental, University, and 

catalog regulations in effect at the time of their re-admission. 


