
 

 

 

Employment of Relatives 

Summary/Purpose:  The purpose of this policy is to prevent nepotism and to prevent unmanaged 

conflicts of interest in the employment context when an employee supervises a relative. 

No individual shall be employed in a department or unit under the supervision of a relative who has or 

may have a direct effect on the individual’s progress, performance or welfare. 

The University has determined that in the context of a temporary employment, a relative does not have a 

direct effect on a temporary assignment (progress, performance or welfare) even though the relative 

supervises the unit or department, if the relative has no role in the hiring decision and does not directly 

supervise the temporary student worker or temporary employee. 

This policy does not prohibit or prevent a temporary student worker or temporary employee from being 

employed in a unit or department where a relative is in the supervisory hierarchy as long as the temporary 

student worker or temporary employee is not hired by nor supervised by a relative.  

However, this policy does not prohibit the continued employment of an employee who was employed in 

the department or institution prior to the time his or her relative became the head of the department of 

institution or member of the Board of Trustees.   

An employee found in this situation shall have all matters dealing with the individual’s progress, 

performance, welfare, assignment, salary, tenure or promotion decided by the next highest administrative 

officer upon approval of the Board. 

Definitions: 

1. For purposes of this policy, Temporary Employment includes: 

 A temporary student worker, which includes but is not limited to graduate and research 

assisgnments. 

 A temporary employee appointment, which includes both “Temp I” and “Temp II” 

assignments. 

 

2. Relative is defined as a spouse, parent, stepparent, sibling, child, stepchild, grandparent, son- or 

Daughter-in-law, father- or mother-in-law, or brother-or sister-in-law. 

 


