
The University of Mississippi 

 

Doctoral Degrees 

     
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL HIGHER DEGREES 

 

Degrees higher than the baccalaureate are granted at The University of Mississippi because of 

special attainments achieved by degree candidates. Prospective students should understand 

clearly that a graduate degree is not awarded upon the basis of a collection of course credits, or 

the passing of certain prescribed examinations, or the submission of a thesis or dissertation. In 

other words, the student cannot expect to receive a higher degree because of successfully 

completing the individual parts of the degree program. Course schedules, examinations, and 

other requirements explained in this catalog are to be regarded as minimal; and any student may 

be required to satisfy whatever additional requirements academic advisers deem appropriate.  

 

To receive a higher degree from The University of Mississippi, the student must demonstrate to 

the satisfaction of the graduate faculty of the department, school, or college of the student and to 

the faculty of the University that the student has attained through intelligence, scholarship, 

industry, and personal qualities the high level of professional and academic competence that the 

faculty of each department expects of a person holding the degree being sought. The 

determination of fitness to qualify for the degree rests solely upon the estimate that the faculty 

makes of the student’s right to the degree. (See also “Operational Procedures” section). 

 

Requirements for the Doctorate ● In addition to the above “General Requirements for all 

Higher Degrees” and those requirements listed below, additional program requirements may be 

found in the description of individual graduate degree programs. 

 

Course Requirements ●  The aim of the doctoral program is to afford instruction and guidance 

leading to the mastery of a major field. Specific course requirements as deemed necessary are 

stipulated by the student’s advisory committee. In certain instances, a student may be required to 

take courses in a minor field. For students required to take a minor, a specific program will be 

formulated. 

 

Degree Credit Requirement ● To fulfill the degree credit requirement, the student must (a) 

have completed three years (54 hours) of study beyond the bachelor’s degree; (b) have completed 

a minimum of two years (36 hours) of graduate study at The University of Mississippi; and (c) 

have completed a minimum of one year (18 hours) of graduate work in continuous residence. 

 

Where course work (excluding dissertation hours) is required for the degree, at least one-half, up 

to 30 hours, must be completed at The University of Mississippi. 

 

Certain nontraditional graduate programs have been approved for delivery at off-campus sites, 

including centers at Tupelo and Jackson. Course work taken at these sites can fulfill the above 

requirements. 

 

Preliminary Examination ●  At or near the beginning of the student’s work beyond the master’s 

degree, the department or school may require a preliminary examination to determine the 



student’s qualifications to undertake a program leading to the doctorate and to assist the student’s 

adviser in planning the student’s program. 

 

Time Limit ●  All required formal course work and the comprehensive exam should be 

completed within four calendar years of initial enrollment into degree seeking (conditional or full 

standing) status, whether a student begins the doctoral program following completion of a 

bachelors or a masters degree.  After passing the comprehensive exam, a student becomes a 

candidate for the doctoral degree and must complete all remaining requirements, including the 

written dissertation and its defense, within five calendar years.  If a candidate does not complete 

all requirements within this time, the Graduate School will change the student’s status to non-

degree seeking. 

 

The Graduate School may grant a one-year extension to this time limit for serious, non-academic 

hardships (e.g., military duty, pregnancy, illness, or problems within the student’s immediate 

family).  Additionally, a student may petition his or her academic program for a limited extension 

for a reason unrelated to personal hardship.  If an academic program grants an extension, it may 

also impose additional requirements, which may include passing another comprehensive 

examination, more course work, and/or other appropriate remedies.  Any extension plan accepted 

by the candidate and the academic program must be approved by the Graduate School. 

 

Comprehensive Examination and Admission to Candidacy ●  All doctoral students must 

successfully complete a comprehensive examination.  Upon completion of this examination, the 

student is admitted to candidacy.  The purpose of this examination is to establish that the student 

has satisfactorily mastered the body of academic material appropriate to the degree. Though 

academic programs have broad latitude in the design of comprehensive examinations, the 

following guidelines should be followed.  The examination may be either a single test or a set of 

tests.  The examination must be written; however, departments may require that part of the 

examination be oral. The examination may be constructed and evaluated by the student’s 

dissertation advisory committee or by a separate committee.  To sit for the examination, a student 

must be in full-standing status, must have satisfied any foreign language requirement, must have 

a graduate grade point average of 3.0 or above, and must not have an outstanding I grade.  If a 

graduate program has an extra-departmental concentration are of more than 12 hours, a 

component of the comprehensive examination must include testing over this second department.  

Upon completion of all components of a comprehensive examination and notification to the 

Graduate School, the student is considered to be a candidate for the degree.  In general, this status 

signifies that the individual has completed all or nearly all of the program course work and has 

entered the formal dissertation (or doctoral essay) stage of the program.  Ordinarily, the 

comprehensive examination should be completed before the dissertation prospectus is defended.  

In any situation in which a student wishes to appeal the results of his or her comprehensive 

examination, he or she may appeal following the procedure in the Graduate Student Appeal 

Process.  

 

Continuous Enrollment ● Upon admission to candidacy, a doctoral student is expected to 

maintain continuous enrollment. Minimum enrollment to fulfill this requirement is 3 hours of 

graduate level course work for fall, spring, or summer terms, with enrollment for at least two of 



these three periods being required for any 12-month period.  (Note that the minimum enrollment 

during the summer would be one hour if the enrollment is not to satisfy the continuous 

enrollment policy.)  The penalty for failure to maintain continuous enrollment, following 

admission to candidacy, is a fee equal to the tuition charge that would be necessary to have 

maintained continuous enrollment for the most recent 12-month period. 

 

Dissertation Formatting, Digital Archiving, and Binding  ● A written dissertation must 

conform to the regulations governing style set forth in the Thesis and Dissertation Manual, 

which is available at the Graduate School’s website.  A digital version of the dissertation must be 

uploaded to the ProQuest/UMI system.  The Graduate School’s website explains the steps for 

completing and submitting the dissertation, including deadlines and fees for publishing and 

binding.  

  

 

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 

 

 

Dissertation Prospectus ●  A Dissertation Prospectus Committee will be appointed by the chair 

of the department to which the student has been admitted. The chair of this committee must be a 

full member of the graduate faculty. A minimum of two additional members of the department 

and one member external of the discipline comprise a committee, all of whom must be members 

of the graduate faculty. The dissertation prospectus must be defended in oral examination and, in 

its final approved form, submitted to the Graduate School. The form of the dissertation 

prospectus will be determined by the committee. The dissertation prospectus oral defense and 

completion of the dissertation defense cannot occur during the same full term (fall, spring, or full 

summer), and there must be a minimum of four calendar months between these events. 

  

Dissertation and Final Oral Examination ●  A minimum enrollment of 18 hours of 

dissertation credit is required of every Ph.D. student.  PhD students must prepare a written 

dissertation and successfully pass a final dissertation defense/examination.  This final 

examination must include an oral component and must be administered by the student’s 

dissertation committee, as scheduled by the Graduate School.  The committee shall direct the 

examination primarily to the defense of the dissertation, though it may include material from the 

student’s major and/or minor fields.  Departments may require a written examination, but the oral 

examination must be conducted.  The oral examination may be given only after the dissertation is 

in final form (that is, ready for submission to the Graduate School, except for corrections 

required by the examining committee at the final examination). The dean of the Graduate School 

will not schedule oral examinations during the regular university examination periods at the end 

of enrollment periods or when the university is officially closed.  

  

 

DOCTOR OF ARTS 

 

 



The Doctor of Arts degree programs have been designed to prepare teachers who possess a 

comprehensive knowledge of their academic area of interest and an ability to perform effectively 

in the classroom. Unlike the Doctor of Philosophy degree in which the primary emphasis is 

placed upon research, the Doctor of Arts degree program places stress upon the breadth of the 

candidate’s knowledge and the attainment of teaching skills. 

 

General Requirements  ● The general requirements for the Doctor of Arts degree include the 

completion of the master’s degree or its equivalent in the candidate’s subject matter area before 

admission to the program, the completion of 60 hours of course work or the equivalent with a 

grade-point average of 3.0 or above, the writing of a doctoral essay or thesis, the passing of a 

comprehensive examination, and the completion of an internship supervised by members of the 

graduate faculty in the area of concentration. 

 

Doctoral Essay ●  Departments giving the Doctor of Arts degree have the option of making 

comprehensive the final examination for the degree or of requiring the student to defend a thesis 

or doctoral essay in an additional final oral examination.  The doctoral essay or thesis for the 

Doctor of Arts degree must conform to the regulations governing style set forth in the Thesis and 

Dissertation Manual, available at the Graduate School’s website. Two copies must be presented 

to the Graduate School after the final examination for the doctorate has been accepted and before 

the beginning of the regular examination period for the semester in which the candidate plans to 

graduate. 

 

Final Oral Examination  ● Unless required by their departments, Doctor of Arts students are 

exempt from the requirement of a final examination. If requested to do so, the dean of the 

Graduate School will appoint an examining committee for a final oral examination. 

 

 

DOCTOR OF EDUCATION 

 

 

Dissertation Prospectus  ● A Dissertation Prospectus Committee will be appointed by the chair 

of the department to which the student has been admitted. The chair of this committee must be a 

full member of the graduate faculty. A minimum of two additional members of the department 

and one member external of the discipline comprise a committee, all of whom must be members 

of the graduate faculty. The dissertation prospectus must be defended in oral examination and, in 

its final approved form, submitted to the Graduate School. The form of the dissertation 

prospectus will be determined by the committee. The dissertation prospectus oral defense and 

completion of the dissertation defense cannot occur during the same full term (fall, spring, full 

summer), and there must be a minimum of four calendar months between these events. 

  

Dissertation ●  A minimum enrollment of 18 hours of dissertation credit is required of every 

Ed.D. student. The dissertation must conform to the regulations governing style set forth in the 

Thesis and Dissertation Manual, available at the Graduate School’s website. A digital version of 

the dissertation must be uploaded to the ProQuest/UMI system.  The Graduate School’s website 



explains the steps for completing and submitting the dissertation, including deadlines and fees for 

publishing and binding.  

 

Final Oral Examination  ● Every candidate for the Ed.D. degree must successfully pass a final 

oral examination (defense of dissertation) administered by the student’s dissertation committee 

and scheduled by the Graduate School. The committee shall direct the examination primarily to 

the defense of the dissertation, though it may include material from the student’s major and/or 

minor fields. Departments may require in addition a written examination, but the oral 

examination must be conducted. The oral examination may be given only after the dissertation is 

in final form (that is, ready for submission to the Graduate School except for corrections required 

by the examining committee at the oral examination). The dean of the Graduate School will not 

schedule oral examinations during the regular University examination periods at the end of 

enrollment periods or when the University is officially closed. 

 


