
The University of Mississippi 

Release of Telephone Call Tracking Information 

Summary/Purpose:  Defines the policy for releasing telephone call tracking data. 

The Telecommunications Center will not release call tracking data (date, time, telephone number, 
length of call) about calls made to or from a University telephone number that is assigned to an 
individual employee unless proper authorization is obtained by the person requesting the 
information from the Director of University Police and Campus Safety. 

The person requesting call tracking data will send a confidential memo to the Director of 
University Police and Campus Safety, with a copy to the Director of Telecommunications, 
detailing the need for this information. The memo must provide the following:  

• Reason for needing the information
• Approximate time when call was made or received
• Date call was made or received
• Telephone number(s) call was made from or received on
• Signature of the person wanting the information

If approved, the Director of University Police and Campus Safety will signify approval by making 
a note of approval, dating, and signing the memo. The Director will send the approved signed 
memo to the Director of Telecommunications in an envelope marked “Confidential” by campus 
mail.  

If information is found, the Director of Telecommunications will print the results, attach a copy of 
the request, and forward the information in an envelope marked “Confidential” to the person that 
requested the information.  

Policy Code ADM.TC.500.003. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
Page 1 of 1 Generated on 02/20/2009 at 14:20:33 CST See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details.

Call Tracking for phone numbers assigned to an employee:

Call Tracking for phone numbers assigned to a department

Requests for call tracking of calls made to a departmental number (not assigned to an individual) can 
be requested via email to the Director of Telecommunications by the department head.  
Telecommunications will verify that the phone number is not assigned to an individual and then email 
the call detail report back to the department head.




