
 

The University of Mississippi 

 

ALCOHOL 

 

Summary/Purpose: To prevent illegal or abusive alcohol consumption.  

 

The University of Mississippi abides by Mississippi State laws and statutes. Students, regardless of age, 

may not possess or consume alcoholic beverages within or around on-campus housing. All alcohol 

offenses will include parental notification through the Dean of Students Office.  

 

In accordance with University Policy, alcoholic beverages may not be consumed in any areas, in or 

around University buildings. The sale of any alcoholic beverage on The University of Mississippi 

campus is prohibited. Students are not permitted to possess or display kegs or any other common 

containers of alcohol, empty or full. As alcohol consumption is the No. 1 inhibitor of students’ academic 

success on all college campuses, empty alcohol containers, beer bongs, or other evidence of prior alcohol 

consumption in student residences are not permitted. If an alcohol bottle or can collection is found in a 

student residence, the student will be asked to dispose of it immediately.  

 

Guests of residents are not allowed to have alcohol regardless of their age. The Department of Student 

Housing staff reserves the right to stop people from bringing alcohol into the building(s). Students and 

their guests may be asked to open all backpacks, bags, coolers and other containers when entering a 

residence hall. This procedure is a safety and security measure that prevents most of the unwanted or 

unauthorized materials from being brought into the halls. Students and guests may be denied entrance if 

they choose not to cooperate with this request.  

 

Minimum sanctions for alcohol and drug violations have been set forth through the University Judicial 

System and are as follows:  

 

 First Offense – Required alcohol/drug education program and related fees or fines, community 
service, and probation for the remainder of current semester and the following two semesters (fall 

or spring) enrolled at the University. Probation extends through any intervening summer terms or 

intersessions.  

 Second Offense while on probation – Suspension from institution. The University Judicial 
Council may elect for the suspension to take effect immediately or to take effect upon completion 

of the current semester following the suspension’s effective date, including summer terms or 

intersessions. Students will be responsible for housing costs as specified in the Housing Contract. 

Suspension does not forgive financial obligations.  
 


