
The University of Mississippi 

Policy Code CHA.LM.200.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
Generated on 07/31/2012 at 11:13:23 CDT See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. Page 1 of 5 

 

 

 
 
 

Records Retention 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Defines the type records, length of retention, and destruction for records 
past the retention date. 

 
 
 

GENERAL INFORMATION: 
 
 
 

Storage of non-current or unofficial copies of records retained for managerial or regulatory 
reasons results in considerable staff, maintenance, and storage expenses for the University. 
Storing records efficiently reduces cost and litigation exposure, improves service, and meets 
accountability commitments (internal or external audit). This document provides departments 
with an efficient policy to manage records by providing retention and disposition guidelines. 
The term "records" is a unit of information, regardless of form, made or received by an 
employee while transacting official business of the University of Mississippi. 

 
Examples of records: include academic files, administrative files, student files, 
correspondence, books, papers, letters, memoranda, forms, charts, reports, maps, 
photographs, films, microfilm, microfiche, electronic files and data processing output in 
media, and sound recordings. 

 
All records (created, received, or maintained) by departments during their operations belong 
to the university and are retained and disposed of according to this policy. Do not dispose of 
University records until the stated minimum retention period has elapsed. Notify the Office 
of Information Technology in writing, for addition or deletions of records to this 
policy. 

 
To add, change, delete a record, or to change the retention period, please send an e-mail to 
the Office of Information Technology. With respect to a particular record, the official office 
of record may submit changes or grant permission to another office to make changes. 

 
Offices that maintain official records should make copies available, upon request, to 
departments requesting copies. 

 
Departments may retain unofficial copies of records for convenience. The department should 
consider the amount of space and personnel time required to maintain the unofficial copies. 
Departments are responsible for making decisions regarding their retention periods for 
unofficial copies of records. 

 
The penalty for theft, deliberate alteration, or destruction of records by any person in a 
manner not authorized by an applicable records control schedule, or the unlawful divulging 
of restricted information under current state law (Mississippi Code 25-59-23) constitutes a 
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not 
greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;amp%3BpolicyObjidPara=10649154
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies
mailto:it@olemiss.edu


The University of Mississippi 

Policy Code CHA.LM.200.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
Generated on 07/31/2012 at 11:13:23 CDT See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. Page 2 of 5 

 

 

 

 
 
 

RECORDS IN THE DEPARTMENT 
 

 
Official records should be stored consistently within the department in a manner that 
provides protection against misuse, misplacement, damage, destruction, or theft. 

 
Departments having the official records for the University take precedence over copies of 
records maintained by individuals or other departments. Original, confidential, and sensitive 
documents should be stored in a secure location and protected according to the University’s 
INFORMATION CONFIDENTIALITY/SECURITY PLAN. 

 
Definition of Records: 

Official Records:  A record with current administrative use for the generating unit. 
Records remain active for varying amounts of time, depending on the purpose. Archival 
Records:  A record that is inactive; not retained in the office in which it originated or 
received; and has permanent or historical value. The University Archives or the 
Mississippi Department of Archives and History keep and stores archival records. 
Official Repository:  The unit designated the responsibility for retention and timely 
destruction of official university records. The administrative manager or designee will 
receive the assign of responsibility. 
University Record:   The original and official copy of a record. 
Permanent Records:  Records essential to the University's ongoing and future operations. 
Vital Records:   Records that would be difficult to reconstruct if lost, stolen, damaged, or 
destroyed and whose loss could result in material damage to the University.  These 
records are essential to document the University's legal position, financial position, and to 
preserve the University's ongoing operations, commitments, and rights. If departments 
think a record vital, they should consider storing copies at a separate location from the 
originals to reduce the potential for loss. 
Inactive Records: Records consulted infrequently (fewer than once a month for each file 
drawer) and no longer needed to conduct current business. 
Unofficial Record:  Unofficial copies maintained in an office for convenience, other than 
the Repository Office. 

 
 

MAINTENANCE OF UNIVERSITY RECORDS 
 

 
Departments must maintain university records in a manner that provides (1) access for 
faculty and staff to carry out normal job responsibilities, and (2) reasonable protection 
against misuse, misplacement, loss, destruction, damage, or theft. 

 
Unless authorized by the Executive Committee (Chancellor, Provost, Vice Chancellors), 
university records must be stored on university premises at all times. 

 
Departments should document official records loaned to other departments or individuals, by 
describing the record, loan date, return date, borrowing department, individual, and signature 
of the borrower. 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;amp%3BpolicyObjidPara=10649154
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies


The University of Mississippi 

Policy Code CHA.LM.200.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
Generated on 07/31/2012 at 11:13:23 CDT See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. Page 3 of 5 

 

 

 
 
 

If possible, departments should maintain records in an environment that is free from rodents, 
flooding, fire hazards, and unusual moisture, heat, and dust. The desirable environment for 
preserving records is a space with forced-air ventilation system that maintains a controlled 
temperature of 65-75 degrees Fahrenheit and a relative humidity of 40-60 percent. 

 
 

MINIMUM RETENTION PERIODS 
 

 
The links below are directed to official repository departments and an index of records. This 
policy lists the minimum record retention requirements for the following: 

 
(1) Compliance with guidelines issued by the University 

 
(2) Providing maximum protection under current State statutes of limitations, 

(3) Supporting general university business practices, 

(4) Providing maximum protection under current Federal statutes of limitations, 

(5) In accordance with Mississippi Department of Archives and History 

(5) External entities that require specific retention periods for records 
 

Note: Individuals responsible for the areas identified in this policy must be aware of all 
applicable laws and external agency regulations that might supersede these minimum 
retention periods. They must follow all laws and regulations in the retention and 
disposition of records. If laws or regulations supersede those noted, notify the Office of  
Information Technology in writing, to change the time noted in the university policy. 

 
Address questions about the minimum retention period for records not listed to the Office of 
Information Technology. 

 
Each department should use their discretion in deciding when to dispose of records after 
meeting all state, federal laws, and requirements in this policy. Departments should save time 
and space by properly disposing of records after satisfying requirements in this policy. 

 
The  Index of Departments with Files/Records Retention Data  provides retention time for 
official records for individual departments. 

 
The  Index of Records is an alphabetical listing of records. To determine the Repository 
Office (official record keeper), click on the record and information will be displayed for the 
official repository and retention time of the official record. 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;amp%3BpolicyObjidPara=10649154
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies
http://www.olemiss.edu/depts/it/records/DEPARTMENTS.html
http://www.olemiss.edu/depts/it/records/INDEX.htm


The University of Mississippi 

Policy Code CHA.LM.200.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
Generated on 07/31/2012 at 11:13:23 CDT See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. Page 4 of 5 

 

 

 

 
 
 

DISPOSAL OF RECORDS 
 

 
University records (regardless of the storage medium) can be disposed of upon reaching the 
minimum retention period stated in this policy, provided the department does not need the 
records for future administrative, legal, research/historical, or fiscal purposes. 

 
1.   Administrative value: contain information applicable to current or future university 

operations 
2.   Legal value: contain evidence of legally enforceable rights or obligations of the 

University 
3.   Research or historical value: document the purpose, growth, history, services, 

programs, and character of the campus 
4.   Fiscal value: required for budget development, financial reporting, or audit purposes. 

 
The department head (or designee) is responsible for performing, at least annually, a review 
to determine the value or usefulness of departmental records. During this review, the 
department head (or designee) should identify and designate for disposal (destruction or 
transfer to an archive) the records with elapsed retention periods (time maintained in office 
plus time in inactive records area) that are no longer useful. 

 
The department head is responsible for authorizing the disposal of records.  When authorized, 
shred records containing sensitive and/or confidential information and dispose of 
shredded material properly by recycling or putting in trash. DO NOT discard documents 
containing sensitive or confidential information in the trash that are not shredded. The 
department head should sign and maintain, in the departmental files or as required by 
campus/unit procedures, a list of the records destroyed. 

 
Erase and verify elimination of data beyond recovery on electronic media (diskette, CD, hard 
drive) before reusing or discarding.  Recycle, if possible, records that do not contain 
personal, confidential, or financial information. The Physical Plant (915-7051) can provide 
information regarding recycling.  Otherwise, tear records in several pieces and place in the 
garbage container. Erase electronic media components for recycling. 

 
Unofficial records do not record official university activities and include: 

 
1.   extra copies of official documents kept for convenience or reference 
2.   stock supplies of publications 
3.   extra copies of circulated materials where original materials are filed; reading files 
4.   follow-up correspondence copies 
5.   draft or work copies of finalized documents 
6.   letters of transmittal that do not alter the transmitted information 
7.   shorthand notes 
8.   tapes of transcribed documents 
9.   routing slips 
10. telephone call slips 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;amp%3BpolicyObjidPara=10649154
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies


The University of Mississippi 

Policy Code CHA.LM.200.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
Generated on 07/31/2012 at 11:13:23 CDT See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. Page 5 of 5 

 

 

 
 
 

11. private materials that are neither made nor received by any administrative staff while 
transacting official business. 

 
ELECTRONIC RECORDS STORAGE: 

 
Electronic record keeping is the storage and retrieval of information in digital form. This 
means of record keeping includes, but is not limited to, the use of tapes, disks and optical 
disks. This applies to all electronic records systems. 

 
Electronic or optical media, both fixed and removable, should have retention and disposition 
instructions incorporated into the system design. These media should be identified in a 
unique and standardized way, be maintained in a temperature-controlled and humidity- 
controlled environment determined by the medium, and be handled appropriately if the 
medium requires special care (e.g., a smoke-free, low-humidity environment). Develop 
procedures to ensure timely backups of data. Consider rotating tapes for vital records. 
Consult vendors of backup media to find out the maximum number of times a given tape may 
be used for backup purposes. The retention period for these records is in accordance with the 
guidelines set forth in this policy. 

 
Disposal of Paper Records after Transfer to Other Media: 

 
Compact storage methods provide a space saving and often cost efficient means of storing 
records originally in paper form. Take extreme care when transferring information to a 
storage medium. Departments must ensure that records are readable and verified for accuracy 
before destroying paper copies. Retain the stored electronic records for the minimum 
retention period specified in this policy. Shred paper records containing sensitive and/or 
confidential information. DO NOT throw documents containing sensitive or confidential 
information in the trash that are not shredded! 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;amp%3BpolicyObjidPara=10649154
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies

