
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 2 
 

Library Gift Policy 

 

Material Donation Policy:  The University of Mississippi Libraries are highly selective in the types of 

donated materials that we accept.  Books and manuscripts that are potentially valuable may not always 

fall within our scope. Gifts are accepted subject to the policies of the University of Mississippi and with 

the understanding that the University, upon receipt of said gift, becomes the owner of the donated 

material and reserves the right to determine retention, location, cataloging treatment, and other 

considerations relating to its use or disposition.  

General Procedures:  Unless a formal gift is established, donors are required to complete a Donor Form 

itemizing the number and type of materials included in the gift. The Library Development Officer will 

then provide a letter of acknowledgement to the donor, which will include a brief description of the type 

of materials included in the gift. The Libraries is unable to provide the donor with an author/title list of 

the materials included in their gift. Additionally, Internal Revenue Service regulations prohibit the 

Libraries and the University from providing the donor with a monetary appraisal of the gift. Such 

appraisals are the responsibility of the donor, as is obtaining tax advice related to gifts. 

 

Part I: General Collections (Williams and Science Libraries) 

Scholarly materials, including books, may be appropriate gifts for the general collection if they support 

the University’s unique teaching and research needs. All gifts will be evaluated by their relevance of 

content to curricula and/or research programs, support of overall collection development priorities, and 

physical condition. 

The Libraries discourage donations of outdated textbooks, offprints, current newspapers, magazines or 

loose issues of journals, audiovisual materials, homemade copies in any format and materials in poor 

condition or heavily underlined are generally not accepted. We do not accept laboratory or repair 

manuals, workbooks, photocopies, and most artifacts (objects) for the general collection. The Libraries 

will decline offers of gifts if they unnecessarily duplicate existing holdings, if the subject matter is outside 

the scope of its collections, or if there are donor restrictions that the Libraries cannot honor. Donors 

should provide itemized lists as set forth above. 

Individuals or groups within or outside the University community must not accept gifts on behalf of the 

Libraries without first consulting with the Dean of Libraries. 

 

Part II: Archives & Special Collections 

The University of Mississippi’s Department of Archives & Special Collections accepts gifts of books,  

manuscripts, and other materials that enrich its existing collections and support the instructional and 

research programs of the University. Gifts of manuscripts may involve additional considerations to be 

discussed between the University and the donor. Other gifts may not be accepted if they duplicate existing 

material in the Library's collections or if their condition would require extensive preservation or 

preparation before they could be added to the collection. Special Collections may decline to accept certain 

gifts, including those which are not within the scope of its collections or that do not support the 

instructional and research programs of the university. 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 2 
 

The Department of Archives & Special Collections collects works related to the following:  

 Mississippi history, including cultural and social works and relevant theses and dissertations. 

 Works of fiction written by Mississippians and alumni of the University of Mississippi. 

 Autobiographies of Mississippians and biographies about Mississippians. 

 Periodicals, newsletters, maps, broadsides, and printed ephemera relating to Mississippi. 

 Private papers documenting Mississippians and their government at both the national and state 

levels. 

 Rare and research-worthy materials within the scope of southern studies (with the “South” 

defined as the area comprised of the former states of the Confederacy). 

 Southern fiction not generally held in other collections. 

 Non-southern rare books are collected on a limited basis. Rarity is judged in terms of other 

institutional holdings of the work, monetary value, age, and condition. 

 African-American fiction and civil rights material. 

 Papers of individual Mississippians and records of corporate bodies, organizations and businesses 

located in Mississippi. 

 Works published by and relating to the history of the University of Mississippi. 

The Blues Archive, located within the Department of Archives and Special Collections collects archival, 

printed, and audio materials documenting the history and roles of blues music in popular culture. 

The Visual Archive and Southern Media Archive, located within the Department of Archives and 

Special Collections, collects photography, film, and audio materials relating to Mississippi, the University 

of Mississippi, and the American South. 

The Modern Political Archives, located within the Department of Archives and Special Collections, 

seeks to acquire, preserve, and encourage research in private papers documenting Mississippians and their 

government at both the national and state levels.  Collecting parameters include the records of 

Mississippi’s congressional delegation, members of the state legislature, Mississippi political parties, 

political journalists and editorial cartoonists, voter registration and voter education organizations, and 

individuals and organizations having a significant impact on the federal or state government.   

 

 


