
 

The University of Mississippi 

Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 

Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

      

 

Policy Name:  Disbursement of Financial Aid 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies 

and procedures for disbursing aid to students. 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

3.1  Disbursement Requirements 

3.2   Timing of Disbursement 

3.3  Confirming Enrollment & Attendance 

3.4  Late Disbursement 

3.5  Delivery of Funds 

3.6  Appendix A 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 COA – Cost of Attendance 

MESG – Mississippi Eminent Scholars Grant 

MTAG – Mississippi Tuition Assistance Grant 

OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 SEOG – Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 

 
  



Part 3.1 Disbursement Requirements 

 

The OFA defines the award year as comprised of:  Fall (Fall Semester, Fall 1 mini-session, 

and Fall 2 mini-session) and Spring (Winter intersession, Spring Semester, Spring 1 mini-

session, and Spring 2 mini-session).  Summer is considered a trailer to the award year.  It is a 

combined term that includes May intersession, First Summer mini-session, Full Summer 

mini-session, Second Summer mini-session, and August intersession.  

 

Because a student may be enrolled for only part of a term due to registration for mini-sessions 

only, the OFA will hold the disbursement of eligible funds (scholarships, loans, and grants) 

based on each individual student’s earliest course start date.  This will ensure that funds are 

not released more than 10 days before the student actually begins classes.  (Course start/stop 

dates are provided by the academic departments and entered into UM’s student system).   

 

All financial aid funds must pass disbursement requirements in order to be processed.  These 

rules are programmed into the OFA database system.  Any disbursement issues create 

“diagnostics” that will explain the reason for the hold.  OFA staff members can easily 

reference the diagnostics to determine what the next steps should be.  Students can also view 

the diagnostic messages for their own financial aid package through the Award Notification 

module in the MyOleMiss portal.  Diagnostics are dynamically created and will be 

automatically removed once an outstanding issue is resolved. 

 

 

Part 3.2 Timing of Disbursement 

 

For Fall and Spring, the disbursement process (to credit funds to student bursar accounts) 

begins approximately 5 days before the beginning of the standard semester.  For Summer, 

disbursement begins approximately 5 days before the beginning of Full Summer/First 

Summer.  Once the process starts for a term, aid is disbursed on a daily basis (business days 

only) as university requirements are met.  For some awards, the credit is made once funds are 

received from an outside source (e.g. non-UM scholarships and loans).  For state grants like 

MTAG and MESG, disbursement will occur once the state office notifies the UM of their 

roster of approved awards. 

 

Students awarded Federal Title IV aid (Pell Grant, Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant, 

SEOG, Federal Direct Loan, Federal Direct PLUS Loan or TEACH Grant) for summer cannot 

receive these monies unless they enroll in all credit hours for all summer terms reported on 

their Summer Application. Non-federal aid ready for release during the summer will credit to 

a student’s bursar account prior to the first day of class if eligibility is met at an individual 

mini-session level. 

 

For students enrolled in iStudy (correspondence courses), no Title IV financial aid will be 

released until the midterm exam is completed (or 50% of the lessons if there is not a midterm 

exam). The midpoint is determined by the iStudy Department. Once confirmation is received, 

the OFA will release funds manually to the student’s bursar account. 

 



Part 3.3 Confirming Enrollment & Attendance 

 

Certain circumstances will prevent automatic disbursement of financial aid. These include:  

 Not Enough Credit Hours to Meet Awarding Requirements – This applies to 
students who are not yet enrolled for any courses, (i.e., new undergraduates do not 

typically sign up for classes until they attend an Orientation session), or who do not 

have enough booked hours. Financial aid is usually provided for full-time students, 

although some aid programs do allow part-time students to receive funding. Students 

who are not registered for enough hours will have to add more classes to qualify for 

some financial aid awards. Students can indicate on their “Financial Aid Award 

Notification” in myOleMiss what their actual enrollment hours will be.  Since 

financial aid packaging is based on anticipated enrollment levels, this could mean that 

awards will be reduced or cancelled if the student does not meet the hours 

requirements for that award.  Please note the enrollment level definitions below: 

 

Program Type Full-time 3/4-time 1/2-time Less than 1/2-time 

Undergraduate, Pharmacy 

(EE 1-3, Pre-Pharm, PY 1-4) 

12 or more 

hours 

9-11 

hours 

6-8 

hours 

1-5  

hours 

Graduate, MBA, PMBA,  

Online Grad 

9 or more 

hours 

7-8 

hours 

5-6 

hours 

1-4  

hours 

Law, LLM – Space Law 
10 or more 

hours 

8-9  

hours 

5-7 

hours 

1-4  

hours 

 

 Waitlisted Courses – This is a tentative class status, for which students are not 
considered to be officially registered. Once a term starts, students should consult with 

their instructor(s) to determine whether they will be enrolled in the desired course(s). 

Or, students may consider signing up for different course(s). Otherwise, if the inability 

to secure a waitlisted course or courses changes a student’s enrollment status (e.g., 

from full-time to part-time), then the student’s financial aid package may have to be 

adjusted. 

 Audit Courses – Courses taken for “no grade” (which means that there will be no 
credits or hours earned for the course), do not count towards a student’s enrollment for 

financial aid purposes. 

 Courses Coded as “Free of Charge” – This course is set by UM administrators, and 
is typically used when outside organizations have a contract with UM to pay for a 

class for their employees. Students who are not responsible for paying any tuition for 

their course(s) have a reduced COA which may impact their eligibility for other 

financial aid.  Any possible awards must be determined and processed manually. 

 Independent Study (iStudy) Courses – Correspondence courses, offered through the 
Office of Independent Study, do not always follow the timeframe of a traditional 

semester. Students enrolled in iStudy courses may or may not be eligible for financial 

aid. Typically, the student must register for term-based (not full-year) iStudy courses 

to qualify. Please visit http://finaid.olemiss.edu/istudy/  for more information. 

  

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/istudy/


 Courses that are Mismatched to the Degree Program – If a student is taking a 
graduate/professional class but pursuing an undergraduate degree, OFA will treat the 

class as irrelevant to the academic program and therefore ineligible for aid. The same 

is true for graduate/professional students taking undergraduate courses (i.e., 100 to 

400 level) – unless those undergraduate classes are specifically listed as required 

prerequisites for your academic program (published in the catalog for all students in 

that major).  The OFA cannot consider case-by-case exceptions, so letters from 

instructors will not be able to establish eligibility. 

The additional reasons below are related ONLY to Federal Title IV aid (Pell Grant, Iraq 

and Afghanistan Service Grant, SEOG, TEACH, Work-Study, Direct Loans, and PLUS 

loans).  

 Attendance Has Not Been Verified – Per federal regulations, students establish 
eligibility for aid only if they actually SHOW UP for their classes. Their presence in a 

class will be documented by the instructor by taking roll or by use of attendance ID 

scanners. This will be done at one of the class meetings within the first two weeks of 

class for a regular Fall/Spring semester (shorter time frames apply for mini-terms like 

Winter Intersession and summer). Please visit https://olemiss.edu/info/gotoclass/. This 

policy also applies to online classes, thesis/dissertation hours, labs, Study Abroad, and 

internships – although the methods of “attendance collection” are modified. 

 Enrollment Was Not Confirmed in All Classes by the Mandatory Drop Date 
(MDD) – Financial Aid will “lock in” enrollment for each term based ONLY on those 

classes in which the student is still actively registered AND attendance has been 

verified.   This will occur on the MDD. Please visit 

https://registrar.olemiss.edu/academic-calendar-menu/ to confirm the MDD for each 

term. Disbursement of Title IV aid for that term will be based only on these “locked 

in” credit hours, and any previously disbursed aid may have to be adjusted to them. 

 Consortium Contract – If a student has a written agreement to take classes at another 
college, and UM has approved these credit hours, then the financial aid must be 

handled manually. Please visit https://finaid.olemiss.edu/study-abroad-and-

consortium-study/ for additional information. 

 Repeated Coursework – A student cannot receive federal student aid for repeating a 
passed course (receiving a “D” grade or higher) more than ONE time, regardless if 

credit is provided again by the institution – and regardless if the academic major 

requires the student to retake the class to obtain a better grade. 

 Remedial Coursework – Only up to 30 semester hours of remedial classes can be 
counted in a student’s enrollment. Remedial courses are identified by the prefix “DS” 

– Development Studies. 

 Coursework Not Counting Towards Your Degree – Only classes that are necessary 
for the student’s major, OR are allowable electives, can be used towards his/her 

enrollment level for federal aid purposes. 

  

https://olemiss.edu/info/gotoclass/
https://registrar.olemiss.edu/academic-calendar-menu/
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/study-abroad-and-consortium-study/
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/study-abroad-and-consortium-study/


Part 3.4 Late Disbursement 

 

In certain conditions, students may still be able to receive a disbursement of federal Title IV 

aid after the payment period is over.  Students may be considered for a disbursement if they 

are otherwise eligible for federal Title IV aid and the following conditions apply: they are no 

longer enrolled for the term at least half-time, or no longer enrolled at UM for the award year.  

Based on federal regulations, the OFA will determine based on the charts in Appendix A, if 

the student is eligible for a late disbursement (see Part 3.6, Appendix A), and if a late 

disbursement request form is required. 

 

 

Part 3.5 Delivery of Funds 

 

If the amount of aid exceeds the amount that the student owes the university, a credit balance 

is created.  In this case, the bursar’s office will refund the difference to the student by direct 

deposit to the student’s personal checking/saving account or via a check mailed to the 

student’s billing address on file.  Students cannot pick up checks in person.  (See the Bursar’s 

policy on “Refund Checks” at 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10

644382.)  

 

All refunds are given to the student except for credit balances caused by a Federal Parent 

PLUS loan.  In these cases, the excess proceeds are delivered to the borrower.  Checks will be 

mailed to the parent address on the PLUS application unless the parent signs up for direct 

deposit for PLUS loans. Direct Deposit applications are available at 

http://www.olemiss.edu/depts/bursar/directdeposit.html. 

 

Federal Work-Study checks, based upon actual hours worked, are issued bimonthly by mail or 

direct deposit through the Payroll Department of Human Resources (see policy “5.0 Federal 

Work-Study”). 

 

Financial aid refund checks that are not consummated within 240 days of issue will be 

cancelled by the Office of the Bursar. The funds will be returned to the financial aid programs 

that caused the credit balance. 

  

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10644382
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10644382
http://www.olemiss.edu/depts/bursar/directdeposit.html


Part 3.6 Appendix A 

 

 



 





  



 

 


