
 
 1of4 

The University of Mississippi 

 

Sabbatical Leave 
 
The Sabbatical Leave Program is a planned faculty enhancement/development program that 

provides an individual a concentrated period of time for full-time scholarly study.  It is the 

intention of this program to improve/expand a faculty member's professional competence and thus 

his/her value to the University.  Sabbatical leaves may be granted for curriculum development, 

instructional improvement and development, research, writing, and other scholarly activities 

consistent with disciplinary and career expectations and practices.  The Sabbatical Leave 

Program is the University's major organized effort at maintaining and enhancing the academic 

vitality of the individual as well as the institution. 

 

1. To qualify for a sabbatical leave a faculty member must hold the rank of assistant professor or 

higher, be tenured, and shall have served full-time on the faculty of The University of 

Mississippi for twelve (12) consecutive semesters of regular session work before the effective 

date of sabbatical leave.   Any other official leave of absence shall not be considered as either 

interrupting or counting as a part of the consecutive service. 

 

2. Compensation for sabbatical leave will be at the rate of one-half of the current academic year's 

salary.  A faculty, member eligible for sabbatical leave may elect to take one semester at full 

pay, or two semesters at one-half pay.  The two semesters at one-half pay need not be in the 

same academic year.  A faculty member may elect to take one semester at half-pay during one 

academic year and the second during a succeeding year, depending on needs and conditions 

within the specific department.  This election, including the specific semesters of the 

sabbatical, must be made at the same time as the proposal and would be evaluated under the 

same criteria as other sabbatical requests.  The compensation due a faculty member while on 

sabbatical leave will be paid according to the regular policy of the institution, and shall be paid 

from the regular payroll.  By law, compensation for leave may not be paid for more than two 

semesters (9 months) of leave time. 

 

3. Application for sabbatical leave shall be submitted through one's department/unit chair to the 

appropriate Academic Dean by November 1 and to the Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic 

Affairs no later than November 15 of the preceding academic year on application forms 

available in the Office of the Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs.  Action on the 

application shall be completed and the applicant notified by February 1. 

 

A request for sabbatical leave shall consist of a completed Application and Recommendation 

for Sabbatical Leave Form and supporting materials, including: 
 
 
 

a. A detailed description of the project to be carried out while on leave, with an indication 
of the anticipated end-product (e.g., a book, monograph, new courses, additional 
expertise); 

 
b. Evidence, if such seems indicated, of the applicant's special competence to carry out 



 
 2of4 

the project; 
 

c. A current curriculum vita; 
 

d. Copies of Faculty Activity Reports for the last five years; 
 

e. A statement of other compensation anticipated during the leave and any services 
required for this compensation. 

 

Initial review of the request for sabbatical leave is by the chairperson of the respective 

department, with any review structure in place by that particular department. The request is 

passed to the dean of the appropriate college to be considered by the dean and any review 

structure that the college may have. It is passed then to the Sabbatical Leave Review 

Committee which, upon consideration, makes a recommendation to the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs. 

 

The Sabbatical Leave Review Committee consists of ten tenured members of the faculty of the 

University. The ten members serve three-year terms and are staggered so that approximately 

one-third of the Committee is replaced each year. Three members must represent the College 

of Liberal Arts, divided according to the following scheme: 

 

Group I - Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Philosophy and Religion, and 

Physics and Astronomy; 

Group II - Departments of Art, Classics, English, Modern Languages, Music, and Theatre 

Arts; 

Group III - Departments of History, Political Science, Psychology, Economics, and 

Sociology and Anthropology. 

 

The Libraries and the Schools of Applied Science, Business Administration, Engineering, 

Accountancy, Pharmacy, Education, Journalism and New Media, and Law have one 

representative each. Members of the Committee are elected by their constituent group. The 

Chairperson of the Sabbatical Leave Review Committee is the Associate Vice Chancellor for 

Academic Affairs, who can vote only in the case of a tie. 

 

4. A faculty member who is granted sabbatical leave will be under regular contract with the 

Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning for the full period of the leave. 

Faculty on sabbatical leave retain all rights, privileges, and prerogatives which they ordinarily 

enjoy with regard to participation in faculty governance and the conduct of university affairs. 

This includes participating in recommendations concerning tenure, promotion, and hiring. 

However, faculty on sabbatical leave may exercise the right not to participate in the activities 

named above and, under ordinary circumstances, are excused from department, school/college, 

and university committee assignments. 

5. A faculty member granted sabbatical leave must enter formal agreement with the Board of 

Trustees to remain on the full-time regular faculty for one semester for each semester of leave 

granted, which service shall follow immediately the termination of the leave period.  (This 



 
 3of4 

agreement may be satisfied by a faculty member repaying to the University that or portion of 

salary paid to him/her while on sabbatical leave that equals the portion of pledged time he/she 

may fail to serve the University in accordance with this agreement.) 

 

6. Sabbatical leave shall be granted for the purpose of professional improvement only.  Faculty 

members may have the right, while on sabbatical leave, to receive any grant or stipend 

designed primarily to further professional growth.  Faculty members on such leave may not 

accept full-time employment or enter into any written or implied obligation of employment 

which would violate the contract for full service he/she will have with his/her institution while 

on leave.  Faculty members, however, may receive compensation from other sources provided 

the total amount of sabbatical pay and other sources pay does not exceed the salary which such 

faculty member would have received during the sabbatical year had he/she not been granted 

the leave.  Under special circumstances, usually involving expensive relocation, the 

Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs may grant an exception based upon a detailed 

statement of other sources of income to be earned while on sabbatical leave. 

 

7. A faculty member on sabbatical leave remains a full-time employee of the Board of Trustees of 

State Institutions of Higher Learning with all benefits and responsibilities continued by law.  

These rights and benefits include those of retirement, insurance, housing, longevity, and other 

benefits. 

 

8. No more than 4 percent of the full-time regular faculty may be on sabbatical leave during any 

one semester.  No department/unit, college, or school may have more than 10 percent of its 

faculty on sabbatical leave in any semester.  Departments/units with fewer than ten eligible 

faculty may have one faculty member on leave in any given semester.  Deviation from this 

policy shall exist only in unusual circumstances. 

 

9. A faculty member returning from sabbatical leave shall submit a written report of his/her 

research or other scholarly or creative accomplishments to the chair of his/her department 

within two months following the beginning of the next regular semester.  The written report is 

to cover whatever information the faculty member deems appropriate to explain what was 

accomplished during the sabbatical leave period.  Whenever possible, tangible evidence of 

any work product will be attached to the report. 

 

The department/unit chair will forward this report along with his/her own written evaluation of 

whether or not the faculty member made appropriate use of the sabbatical leave to the dean of 

the school.  The dean shall in turn forward these two reports along with his/her written 

evaluation of the faculty member's sabbatical to the Sabbatical Leave Review Committee, 

which in turn shall forward these reports along with its evaluation to the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs.  If either the department/unit chair or the dean believes that 

the faculty member's report is inadequate, then the faculty member shall be notified in regard 

to the inadequacy of his/her report and shall be given thirty days to respond and provide 

additional information.  If the Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs concludes that 

the faculty member made inadequate use of his/her sabbatical period, the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs, after consultation with the faculty member, his/her 



 
 4of4 

department/unit chair and dean, may recommend that this inadequate use of the sabbatical 

period be responded to by steps ranging from consideration in future evaluations of the faculty 

member's performance to repayment of the excused course load assignments in future 

semesters through overload assignments, depending upon the extent of the inadequate use of 

the sabbatical leave.   

 

10.  Periods between sabbatical leave shall be the same as the period for eligibility.  Credit 

toward another sabbatical leave will begin with the next academic year regardless of whether an 

awarded sabbatical leave is taken for a full year or either semester of a year. 

 

11.  Sabbatical leave requests will be disapproved when financial or other considerations may 

make such action necessary. 

 

 


