
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Meals - Travel 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Handling of meal expenses when in travel status. 
 
 
General  
The State Fiscal Management Board will periodically establish a maximum daily expenditure 
limit (see below) for meals in-state and out-of-state travel. A record should be kept of the cost of 
meals and this amount claimed on the Travel Reimbursement Voucher. If actual expenses exceed 
the maximum daily allowance, the travel clerk will make an adjustment when the voucher is 
processed. Alcoholic beverages are not reimbursable. 
 
No reimbursement is authorized for meals when travel is confined to the vicinity of Oxford or 
the Oxford Campus. 
 
Maximum Daily Meal Allowance 
The current maximum daily allowances are as follows: 
In-state except high cost         $41.00 
Out-of-state except high cost         $41.00 
High cost area (prescribed maximum daily rate of $150 – 164 in the Federal Register) $46.00 
High cost area (prescribed maximum daily rate of  $165 - 179 in the Federal Register) $51.00 
High cost area (prescribed maximum daily rate of  $180 – up in the Federal Register)    $56.00 
International Travel                                               $61.00 
 
Meal Tips  
Meal tips should be included as a part of the daily meal limitation. If the daily limitation is 
exceeded because of tips, it is allowable to record total meal tips for each day under "Other 
Expenses" on the Travel Reimbursement Voucher. Total meal tips shall not exceed 20% of the 
maximum daily limitation. 
 
Registration or Banquet Meals 
If conference registration fees include certain meals, do not claim the covered meals as a separate 
item of expense on the Travel Voucher.  Any meals claimed that are covered by the conference 
registration fee must be justified. 
 
Taxable Meals  
Taxable meals are meal expenses that occur during official travel where overnight stay is not 
required. Taxable meals will not be reimbursed. If a traveler stays with a relative or friend, 
they should make a footnote on their Travel Reimbursement Voucher by explaining why there is 
no hotel/motel receipt. 
 
Group Meal  
University employees may be reimbursed for the cost of group meals while carrying out their 
employment duties. A group meal is defined as a meal for one or more University employees and 
one or more individuals that are not employees of the University. The request for reimbursement 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

for group meals should be in the form of a Request for Payment submitted to Procurement 
Services with an itemized receipt for the cost of the meals attached. The memorandum should 
indicate the names of the persons in attendance and the nature of the meeting. If the average cost 
per person exceeds $30.00, the reimbursement must be approved by the Provost or the 
appropriate Vice Chancellor. The University will not reimburse any employee for the cost of 
alcoholic beverages consumed with the meal. 
 
This policy will cover group meals for persons in travel status as well as those meals of an 
official nature in Oxford. 
 
The cost of group meals while in travel status should be excluded from the Travel 
Reimbursement Voucher and submitted on a Request for Payment with receipts attached to the 
Office of Procurement Services. 
 
The definition of a group meal does require that the group include one or more individuals 
who are not employees of the University. In other words, if three individuals from the 
University have lunch together, each employee would be responsible for his or her own meal 
cost. 
 
Approved group meals will not be treated as travel costs but will be accounted for as 
commodities (G/L code 56440, Food for Persons). 
 
 


