
Page 1 of 4 

 

The University of Mississippi 
 

Policy on University Standing Committees 

 
 

Definition and Purpose 

 

The University Standing Committees are appointed to bring together faculty, staff, alumni, 

students, and administrators for the purpose of collecting, exchanging, and weighing information 

and opinions and submitting to the Chancellor and/or Provost recommendations for changes that 

the committees deem necessary for the general good of the University. Each committee has the 

responsibility of continually reviewing practices and policies in its area of concern, as well as 

performing specifically designated duties. The University Standing Committees are advisory to 

the Chancellor and/or Provost and, as such, perform a significant role in the governance of the 

University. Since these committees are an important source of faculty, student and staff input in 

the governance of the University, and since committee membership is viewed as a University 

service for the purpose of tenure and promotion, individuals who agree to serve on the University 

Standing Committees are expected to be diligent in their attendance and committee tasks.  

Decisions made by Standing Committees shall be regarded as recommendations until approved 

by the Chancellor, except in special cases as outlined in the committee descriptions. The format 

for conducting meetings of Standing Committees and for preparing and filing the minutes of the 

Standing Committees is outlined on the following pages. Permanent copies of Standing 

Committee minutes are maintained in the Office of the Chancellor and the J.D. Williams Library. 

 

 

Appointments and Membership 

 

The Committee on Committees of the Senate of the Faculty makes recommendations for faculty 

membership on University Standing Committees except for those committees for which there are 

election processes. These faculty representatives serve only one-year terms, notwithstanding the 

fact that other members are appointed for longer terms (typically 3 years). A subcommittee 

appointed by the President of the Staff Council makes recommendations for staff membership on 

University Standing Committees except for those committees for which there are election 

processes. On committees where the chair has not been designated, the first person named on the 

committee membership shall convene the committee for the purpose of selecting a chair. The 

initial meeting must be called within fourteen days of the start of fall semester classes. (A call for 

the initial meeting of the Artist Series, Lecture Series, and Intercollegiate Athletics committees 

should be within fourteen days of their annual start date.) All committee chairs are elected 

annually unless otherwise noted. Please notify the Chancellor’s Office with the name of your 

Chair when he/she has been selected. Faculty representation on all University Standing 

Committees is limited to faculty members without administrative titles except for those with no 

higher than departmental chair. Therefore, deans, associate deans, assistant deans, directors, 

associate directors, assistant directors, etc., may not serve as faculty representatives on 

University Standing Committees. This does not prevent such individuals from serving as 

administrative representatives. In general, a faculty member is defined as any full-time, tenure-

track professor above the rank of Instructor. 



Page 2 of 4 

 

 

 

Terms and Length of Appointments 

 

Unless otherwise noted, a Standing Committee is appointed for a term that shall run from the 

first day of fall classes to the first day of fall classes. Faculty membership on standing 

committees is generally a three-year term unless otherwise noted. Faculty membership to 

Standing Committees is staggered when possible to provide continuity within the committee's 

membership. The Senate of the Faculty and Staff Council nominations should be submitted to 

the Chancellor early in May. The ASB, Graduate Student Council, and Staff Council 

nominations should be submitted to the Chancellor early in May. New terms for committee 

members shall begin with the appointments by the Chancellor and/or Provost. 

 

 

Duties of Chairs of University Standing Committees 

 

1. Obtain from the previous chair the records of the committee and apprise 

himself/herself and the committee members of general and specific duties of 

the committee. 

 

2. Arrange for meeting times appropriate for all members. Secure a meeting 

place, prepare agendas, and call meetings of the committee. 

 

3. Obtain or arrange for the provision to the committee of data, additional 

expertise, survey results, etc., so that the duties of the committee can be 

efficiently carried out and recommendations of import and substance can be 

generated. 

 

4. Report any chronic absences or resignations of committee members so that 

replacement appointments may be made. 

 

5. Prepare or supervise the preparation of an annual report of the activities and 

recommendations of the committee. Forward an original and one copy of 

the report to the Office of the Chancellor and one copy to the Committee 

on Committees of the Senate of the Faculty. 

 

6. Maintain a file that will include: 

a. a statement of the function of the committee 

b. the approved minutes of each committee meeting 

c. the annual report of the committee 

d. documents, correspondence, data and other information that might 

be of continuing value to the committee 

 

7. Forward committee records to the new committee chair when a new 

committee chair is appointed. 

 

 



Page 3 of 4 

 

Committee Minutes (preparation, recording, and filing) 

 

All committees are expected to keep minutes of all meetings and records of policy 

decisions and actions. Minutes shall be made available to all members of the faculty and staff. 

Unless otherwise noted, minutes of all standing committees should be delivered to the Office of 

the Registrar. Upon final approval or disapproval by the Chancellor, one copy will be returned to 

the chair of the committee indicating the action taken, after which the chair is authorized to act 

accordingly; one copy will be retained in the Office of the Chancellor; and the original will 

become a part of the official records in the archives and special collections of the J.D. Williams 

Library for use by any faculty or staff member. Since the committee minutes will be bound and 

will become a part of the permanent records of the University, it is desirable that all minutes 

should follow an established form: 

 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE (full title of committee) 

a. the date, and place of meeting, followed by 

b. the name of the presiding officer, followed by 

c. list of members present, followed by 

d. list of members absent, followed by 

e. the minutes of the meeting broken down into numbered paragraphs 

f. the name of the chair and the signature either of the chair or the 

secretary of the committee, followed by 

g. a place for the Chancellor's signature. 

In all cases a left-hand margin of at least 1 2 inches should be allowed for binding 

purposes. 

 

 

Annual Report Instructions 

 

In April of each year, the Office of the Chancellor will request of Committee Chairs an 

Annual Report of the activities and recommendations of the Committee.  The Annual Report is 

a permanent record. So that each report in the volume will be consistent in format, each 

committee Chair is requested to adhere to the following guidelines in preparing the Annual 

Report. 

1. Reports can be submitted electronically in ASCII plain-text form or delivered 

in final format on white ripple bond to the Chancellor=s Office. 

2. Reports should use Arial font 12-pitch. 

3. The report should be no longer than ten, 8 2" by 11" double-spaced 

pages. 

4. The margin should begin 1 2 inches from the top of the page; the left-hand 

margin should be 1 2 inches, with a right-hand margin of 1 inch. 

5. The report should be neat, grammatically correct, and free of mechanical 

errors. 

6. A cover page is not necessary. The following information should be shown at 

the top of the first page of the report: 

NAME OF COMMITTEE 

Jane Q. Doe, Chair 

20xx-20xx 



Page 4 of 4 

 

 

 

University Standing Committees 
 

The following is a list of University Standing Committees: 

 

* Academic Discipline 

* Academic Freedom and Faculty Responsibility 

* Academic Suspension and Dismissal Appeals 

* Academic Grade Appeal 

* Accessibility 

* Artist Series 

* Athletic Compliance 

* Buildings, Grounds and Renovations 

* Calendar Committee 

* Campus Internationalization Committee 

* Copyright Committee 

* Council of Academic Administrators 

* External Academic Affairs Committee 

* Faculty and Staff Appeals 

* General Education Committee 

* Graduate Council 

* Honors Day 

* Instructional Technology 

* Intercollegiate Athletics 

* International Student Programs 

* Lecture Series 

* LGBTQ Affairs 

* Library Council 

* Museums 

* Recreational Facilities 

* Recruitment, Admissions, Orientation, and Advising 

* Research Board 

* Retirement and Insurance 

* Sabbatical Leave Review 

* Sensitivity and Respect 

* Staff Appreciation 

* Strategic Planning Council 

* Student Life Affairs 

* Tenure and Promotion Appeals 

* Tenure and Promotion Review 

* Traffic and Parking    

* Undergraduate Council 

 

The composition and function of these committees is given in the Standing Committee Booklet, 

which can be found on the UM web site at http://www.olemiss.edu/news/committees/. 

 


