
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Private Vehicle - Travel 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Reimbursements for use of a private vehicle while in travel status. 

 

 

Employees shall receive the legal rate established by the State of Mississippi for each mile 

actually and necessarily traveled in a privately owned vehicle while in official travel status.  This 

rate will be the same rate that federal employees are reimbursed for using private vehicles for 

official federal business. Please check the travel website for the mileage rate.   

 

The travel clerk will use the latest edition of the Rand McNally Highway Mileage Guide to 

compute mileage between points. Rand McNally now has a Windows software product, 

"Delorme Street Atlas USA 2015” that is inexpensive and would be helpful for those who travel 

often. 

 

In-town mileage should be shown as a separate entry under mileage on the Travel 

Reimbursement Voucher. 

 

The University will not reimburse travel within the boundaries of the Oxford Campus. 

 

When travel is by private vehicle, the total travel expenses reimbursed, including meals and 

lodging, shall not exceed the cost of the lowest unrestricted air fare unless a complete written 

justification signed by the employee’s department head (see statement below) determines that it 

is in the best interest of the University that the employee drive, or that, on comparison of “total 

driving” and “total flying” expenses, it is less expensive to drive than to fly.   

 

Statement and Justification required 

“In my opinion, it is in the best interest of the University that (employee name) use his/her 

private vehicle for travel from (origin) to (destination) from (date) to (date).”  This statement will 

require complete justification by the department head. 

 

When two or more employees travel in one private vehicle, only one travel expense at the 

authorized reimbursement rate per mile shall be allowed.  The person claiming reimbursement 

shall report the names of other university employee passengers.  If a cost comparison must be 

made between driving vs. flying cost, the cost of flying should be multiplied by the number of 

passengers and compared to the cost of driving. 

 

 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/travel/

