
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Lester Hall 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Defines guidelines for the use of temporary office space on the 2nd Floor, west 

side of Lester Hall. 
 
GENERAL  

The 2nd Floor of Lester Hall provides temporary office space for displaced departments to use while a 

building or offices are constructed or renovated. This space is not for housing departments on a 

permanent basis.  

POLICY  

The Provost, or a designated representative of the office, determines who is eligible to occupy 

this space and the amount of space to be provided.   

Departments will occupy the same general area of the suite. Once moved into the suite, occupants 

cannot move around to different offices in the suite. Occupants cannot expand beyond their 

assigned space without permission of the Provost or a designated representative of the office.  

Departments will have access to only rooms required for operations of the department. Non-

essential items for operations (files, furniture, and so on) may be stored at the Central Storage 

Warehouse. This storage must be coordinated with the Provost or a designated representative of 

the office. 

Departments or offices displaced for reasons other than renovation or construction are addressed on 

an individual case basis.  

More than one department can occupy the suite. Each department is responsible for the 

security of their assigned offices.  

The Provost will notify departments when the actual move to and from Lester Hall will take 

place. Moves are contingent on renovation or construction dates, logistics, and status of a 

permanent location.   

24-hour access to Lester Hall will be provided with an electronic card reader using the 

University identification card.  Cards will be programmed through the ID Center located in 

Johnson Commons.  

The department designee will assign offices.  The occupants will sign for keys to individual offices. 

Master keys will not be available to occupants.  Instead, a departmental key ring that has a key for 

each departmental office will be issued to each department head.  The ring and keys will be the 

responsibility of the department head and must be relinquished when vacating the building.  

The department occupying space in the building is responsible for replacement cost of the lock and 

new key if any original key is lost or stolen. The charge to replace the lock and key is based  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

on time and materials to make the change. Upon moving from Lester Hall, the occupants will return 

all keys to the Facilities Management. The department pays for changing locks and replacing keys 

for any key not returned.  

Upon vacating the building, Facilities Management will inspect the area(s) used by the department 

to determine the condition.  Damages to the building are the responsibility of the department 

occupying the space where the damage occurred. Such repairs may include, but are not limited to, 

filling nail holes, patching sheetrock, and painting as a result of hanging items on the wall. All 

repairs will be done by Facilities Management.  

Departments will not modify or change (paint, floor covering, and the like) the room(s) 

occupied.  

Occupants should report any problems with the building by sending a SAP notification or calling 

Facilities Management at 915-7003. In addition, a building mayor will be appointed and announced.   

Facilities Management “Forced Move” account pays for moving the displaced department or persons 

to the building and to new or renovated space when completed.   

Facilities Management “Forced Move” account will also pay for transferring existing 

communications, network, and cable television services to the building and to new or renovated 

space when completed. The department pays for any additional services requested.  

Facilities Management will provide furniture, telephones and accessories to function in the building. 

Department chairs with faculty/staff occupying space in Lester Hall will be asked to sign for and 

assume responsibility for furniture and equipment in their designated spaces.  It is recommended that 

department chairs require faculty/staff to sub-sign for furniture and equipment in their respective 

offices.  Inventory audits will be conducted before and after each change over period. Furniture, 

telephones, and other equipment will not be removed from the building.  


