
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 14 

Patents and Inventions 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To designate the University of Mississippi policy for intellectual property 
rights as they pertain to patentable materials, including inventions, but excluding copyrights. 
 

I. FOREWORD  

The development, dissemination and transfer of new knowledge historically has been the 

responsibility of the University of Mississippi mostly through teaching and publications. More 

recently, universities have also awakened to the importance of technology-based research and 

development to the overall mission of the university. Implicit in this awareness is the under-

standing that universities have the responsibility not only to bring new knowledge into use by the 

public, but also that such knowledge or technology sometimes has commercial value and should 

be treated as a financial asset to be used, conserved or applied in such a way as to generate 

appropriate financial return to the inventor, the university and, when applicable, the licensee of 

the technology. In the case of the University of Mississippi, priority will be put on placing such 

technology in Mississippi with Mississippi firms.  

The objectives of this policy, then, are:  

• To develop a framework for encouraging research, scholarship and a spirit of 

entrepreneurship within the University;  

• To provide incentives and assistance to inventors to develop and commercialize 

technology for the benefit of the inventor, the University and the public;  

• To safeguard innovative technology from unauthorized use; and  

• To provide a framework to determine the commercial value of new technologies, bring 

them to public use, and provide for the equitable distribution of income, including 

royalties, to the inventor, the University and other applicable parties.  

II. DEFINITIONS AND EXPLANATION OF TERMS USED IN THIS POLICY  

A. Intellectual Property 

Intellectual Property is defined as any technical innovation, invention, discovery, or 

know how, as well as writings and other information in various forms including 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 14 

computer software. It may be the product of a single inventor or a group of inventors 

who have collaborated on a project. The principal rights governing ownership and 

disposition of technology are known as "intellectual property" rights, which are derived 

primarily from legislation granting patent, copyright, trademark and integrated circuit 

mask work protection. This policy covers only tangible innovations, inventions and 

know-how; copyright and trademark protections may be covered in separate University 

policies.  

B. Invention 

Invention, for the purposes of this policy, refers to any item that reasonably appears to 

qualify for protection under United States patent law or other protective statutes, 

whether or not actually patentable, or which appears to be commercially licensable. The 

term does not refer to computer software, which is the subject of a separate University 

policy.  

C.  Patents 

Patents are issued by the United States Patent and Trademark Office and are grants that 

give an inventor the right to exclude from all other claimants the right to manufacture, 

fabricate, use or sell an invention within the United States, its territories and posses-

sions, usually for a period of 17 years from the date of the patent issue. This 17-year 

period is exclusive of certain regulatory delays such as those sometimes imposed by the 

Food and Drug Administration. To be considered patentable, an invention must be 

useful, non-obvious, and new. A patent can be issued for a process, machine, article of 

manufacture, composition of matter (most often a chemical), or new life form, including 

any new, useful and non-obvious modification or improvement of prior technology. A 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 14 

"utility" or "use" patent can be issued for a new use of an existing composition of 

matter, and a "design" patent may be obtained for any new, original and non-obvious 

ornamental design for an article of manufacture. "Design" patents are issued for 14 

years. A grace period of up to 12 months from the first oral or written public disclosure 

of an invention is allowed prior to filing a patent application in the United States.  

D.  Foreign Patents 

Foreign Patents. Patenting procedures in foreign countries vary considerably in 

administrative content, the length of patent grants and in the definition of what is 

eligible to be patented. Although grace periods for oral or written public disclosures are 

allowed in the United States, this is not the case in foreign countries. In most foreign 

countries, an invention is not patentable unless the patent application is filed prior 

to any public disclosure (written or oral), in the U.S. or abroad. Inventors who 

contemplate both foreign and domestic patents should contact the Director of Tech-

nology Transfer for further information.  

E.  Tangible Research Property 

Tangible Research Property refers to products that can be distinguished from ideas or 

processes that do not generate a physical artifact. Examples of such property would 

include prototypes and drawings from engineering and design work, circuit chips, 

biological organisms and other products which can be handled and transported. A 

special form of tangible research property is computer software. A characteristic of 

tangible research property is that it may be distributed without obtaining intellectual 

property protection (patents or copyrights) by the use of formal contracts, user licenses, 

or other contractual agreements.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 14 

F.  Non-patented Technology (Know-how) 

Non-patented Technology (Know-how) refers to unique processes or techniques that 

are utilized in the development of or in procedures followed in the course of research or 

in the use of an invention. Examples of know-how include a specialized technique of 

mounting difficult to handle specimens on a microscope slide for study, an innovative 

technique in distilling a chemical compound for use in a research project, or the creative 

use of film, lighting and developing processes that captures photographic images on 

film. The key to determining whether a process falls under this definition is whether the 

end result could not be obtained in a satisfactory manner without the knowledge and 

correct application of this specialized process. In some cases the know-how that 

accompanies a patented technology may be more valuable than the patent itself.  

G.  Trade Secret 

Trade Secret refers to almost any secret that is used in business or in research 

surrounding the development of a tangible product that will give the owner of the secret 

an edge over competitors. It is also used in software development. Trade secrets are 

under the protection of state laws; there are no federal trade secret laws. Each individual 

having access to the secret information must be bound by a contractual agreement 

called a nondisclosure or confidentiality agreement. Failure on the part of one or more 

individuals to adhere to the nondisclosure agreement results in violation of the state law, 

and will nullify the protection of the trade secret.  

H.  Royalties 

Royalties are a form of income that is received by the inventor and the University as a 

result of a license granted to a company or other entity to develop, manufacture or 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 14 

otherwise use or produce the invention for sale or distribution. The royalty rate, usually 

a percentage of sales of the invention, is negotiated as part of the license agreement 

between the University and the licensee. This agreement is a binding contract.  

I.  Other Income 

Other Income refers to any other form of income that may be derived by the inventor 

or the University as a result of the development and distribution of a patented product or 

other invention.  

J.  Substantial Use of University Resources 

Substantial Use of University Resources, within the context of this policy occurs 

when an invention results from use of University of Mississippi facilities, equipment 

(except typewriters or word processors), supplies in excess of $100 total value, 

personnel or other resources.  

K.  University Personnel 

University Personnel includes all faculty and staff, with full or part-time status, and 

any other employee, agent or Fellow of the University, during the course of employ-

ment. For the purposes of this policy, the term "employee" will be synonymous with 

"University personnel."  

L. General Scope of Assigned Duties 

General Scope of Assigned Duties is defined in Section IV, A.  

III.  WHO IS COVERED BY THIS POLICY  

All University personnel are covered by this policy.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 6 of 14 

IV.  WHAT IS COVERED BY THIS POLICY  

A. Inventions Resulting from University-Sponsored Research  

The University shall have ownership of any invention developed in the course of the 

assigned duties of all University personnel. Each employee is required to assign to the 

University all domestic and foreign rights to any invention made within the scope of his 

or her assigned duties, unless the Associate Vice Chancellor for Research notifies, in 

writing, that the University abandons its interest in the invention. An invention will be 

considered as having been made within the general scope of assigned duties:  

1. Whenever the duties include research or investigation or the supervision of 

research or investigation, and the invention arises in the course of such 

research or investigation and relates to the general field of an inquiry to which 

the person is assigned, or  

2. Whenever the invention is in a substantial degree made or developed through 

the use of University financing or on University time. 

B. Inventions Resulting from Externally-Sponsored Research  

Any discoveries or inventions made or produced during the course of externally 

sponsored research will be owned by the University of Mississippi. However, if the 

University determines that it is in its best interest, the Office of Research may enter into 

agreements with sponsors which relinquish or share all or part of intellectual property 

that results from externally sponsored research. This procedure will ensure that the 

interests of the inventor, the University and the sponsor are considered whenever 

external funds are granted to the University for research and development. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 7 of 14 

C.  Inventions Resulting from Activities Outside the Scope of Employment  

Any inventions that are developed and achieved by University personnel on their own 

time and at their own expense, including inventions derived from the private consulting 

services of University personnel, provided that "substantial use of University resources" 

has not been used to develop the invention, will be the exclusive property of the 

inventor. If the inventor desires, a request may be made to the Associate Vice 

Chancellor for Research to assign such an invention to the University. If assignment 

occurs, the inventor and the University will share any royalties or other income derived 

from the invention in the same manner as in all other inventions owned by the 

University. 

V.  OBLIGATIONS OF THE INVENTOR AND THE UNIVERSITY  

A.  Obligations of the Inventor to the University  

1.  Disclosure 

Disclosure. University personnel who produce an invention that may have 

commercial value are obligated to disclose such inventions to the University when 

such an invention is made in the course of his or her assigned duties, or involves 

"substantial use of University resources," or results from externally-sponsored 

research or University-sponsored research. The disclosure must be in writing, and 

it must be full and complete, as determined by the Associate Vice Chancellor for 

Research. The mechanism for making this invention disclosure is the Record of 

Invention form or a revision of the form that may be made from time to time. The 

Office of Research will acknowledge receipt of a disclosure when it is full and 

complete. Inventors are encouraged to contact the Office of Research for 

assistance in reporting any potentially patentable or otherwise commercializable 

invention or technology.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 8 of 14 

2.  Assignment of Rights 

Assignment of Rights. The inventor is obligated to assign patent and all other 

proprietary rights of the invention to the University, unless the invention was 

made outside the general scope of the inventor's assigned duties.  

 

If the inventor believes that the invention was made outside the general scope of 

his or her assigned duties and is unwilling to assign the rights of the invention to 

the University, the inventor can, in the Record of Invention form, request the 

Associate Vice Chancellor for Research to make a determination of the respective 

rights of the University and the inventor in the invention. If the inventor disagrees 

with the decision, he or she can appeal the decision to the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs. To assist in making decisions regarding rights 

of the inventor and University, the inventor should include the following 

information as an addendum to the Record of Invention form:  

a. The circumstances under which the invention was made and 

developed. 

b. The inventors official duties, as given on his or her contract 

with the University or as otherwise assigned at the time of the 

development of the invention.  

3.  Cooperation in Technology Development 

Cooperation in Technology Development. The inventor is obligated to assist 

University officers and the Associate Vice Chancellor for Research in carrying 

out the work necessary to patent, market, license or otherwise commercialize the 

invention.  

4.  Timely Reporting to the University 

Timely Reporting to the University. Since public disclosure of an invention 

constitutes a statutory bar to the granting of a patent for an invention, the inventor 

is obligated, whenever possible, to report his or her invention prior to describing 

the invention in public.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 9 of 14 

5.  Delay in Publishing or Other Public Disclosure 

Delay in Publishing or Other Public Disclosure. To protect the interests of the 

inventor and the University, the Associate Vice Chancellor for Research may 

require a delay in making public the nature of the invention until a patent 

application is filed to protect the interests of the inventor and the University. 

Specifically, this may require that the inventor withhold, for a reasonable time: 

publicity concerning the invention; disclosure of the invention in a public 

meeting, professional convention or meeting; or disclosure of the invention in a 

scientific or other publication. Such a delay is in no way intended to abridge the 

right, privilege and duty of faculty and other research personnel to publish the 

results of research conducted at the University, and such a delay will be kept to 

the minimum necessary to protect the patentability of the invention.  

 

In a similar manner, the Associate Vice Chancellor for Research may withhold 

from the library shelves, and decline to distribute for a limited time, any thesis or 

dissertation that contains descriptions of any technology that is being considered 

for patenting or for which a patent application is being prepared. The dissertation 

or thesis will be held by the Dean of the Graduate School until the patent appli-

cation is filed or the decision is made to abandon the pursuit of a patent. This 

procedure will not affect the standing of the student and he or she will be awarded 

the degree on schedule. 

 

B.  Obligations of the University to the Inventor  

1.  Timely Determination of Interest 

Timely Determination of Interest. The University has the obligation to make a 

timely determination of its interest in pursuing a patent or exerting other 

proprietary rights concerning an invention. If the determination is made not to 

exert its proprietary rights in the invention, the University is obligated to release 

its rights, in writing, to the inventor. Normally, this determination will require no 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 10 of 14 

longer than 90 days from the date at which a full and complete Record of 

Invention form is submitted by the inventor.  

2. Reasonable Efforts to Commercialize 

Reasonable Efforts to Commercialize. The University has the obligation to 

make reasonable efforts to commercialize any inventions to which it holds 

proprietary interest or, alternatively, to release all or an equitable part of that 

interest to the inventor.  

3.  Income Sharing 

Income Sharing. The University has the obligation to share with the inventor an 

equitable portion of the income that is generated by the commercial development 

of the invention. This includes the sharing of royalty or other income. 

VI.  THE PROCESS OF OBTAINING PATENT COVERAGE  

A.  The Office of Research 

The Office of Research is the focal point for decisions made regarding technology 

transfer activities on the campus. Record of Invention forms are submitted to and acted 

upon by the Office of Research. Office of Research staff recommend decisions 

regarding the patenting of a particular invention and, assisted by the inventor, make 

marketing strategy and commercial development decisions concerning the invention. 

Office of Research staff also provide education and advice about patents and licensing; 

determine resolutions for unique situations, including the arbitration of disputes; and 

make recommendations about assigning rights of the invention back to the inventor.  

B.  Invention Disclosure 

Invention Disclosure. A Record of Invention form is submitted by the inventor to the 

Office of Research. Copies of these forms are available in the Office of Research. The 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 11 of 14 

function of Record of Invention is to clarify and describe fully and completely the 

proposed invention and the circumstances of its discovery. It is important to fill out the 

form as completely as possible since it serves as a basis for evaluation of patentability 

and commercial potential of the discovery or invention. Inventors are encouraged to 

contact the Office of Research for assistance in reporting any potentially patentable or 

otherwise commercializable invention or technology.  

C.  Evaluation  

1. If the inventor asserts in the Record of Invention form that the invention resulted 

from activities outside the scope of University employment, the Associate Vice 

Chancellor for Research will make a determination of the respective rights of the 

University and inventor in the invention. (See Paragraph V.A.2. for further 

discussion.)  

2. Once it has been determined that the Record of Invention is full and complete, the 

Office of Research staff will examine the invention from legal, patentability, 

technological, and marketing standpoints and recommend to the Associate Vice 

Chancellor for Research a determination of the University's interest in pursuing a 

patent or exerting other proprietary rights concerning the invention. Staff may 

also recommend additional R & D steps that must be completed prior to 

submitting a patent application. If a determination is made not to pursue the 

University's proprietary rights, the Associate Vice Chancellor for Research will 

notify the inventor, in writing, that the University releases its rights to the 

inventor provided that all further development of the invention will be at the 

expense of the inventor, on his or her own time, and will not entail the substantial 

use of University resources.  

3. If a disclosed invention is determined to be more appropriately "know-how" or 

tangible research property, the inventor will be notified, and steps will be taken to 

investigate the possibilities of licensing the invention as non-patented technology. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 12 of 14 

4. Normally, these determinations will require no longer than 90 days from the date 

at which a completed Record of Invention form is submitted by the inventor.  

D.  Patenting and Licensing 

Patenting and Licensing. If a decision is made to file a patent application, the 

University will file the application within 270 days of making the determination that a 

patent will be pursued, unless delays are caused because the application requires more 

information that must be provided by the inventor or for other reasonable circumstances 

that delay the filing. In many instances, the University will attempt to negotiate a 

license agreement in which the licensee files the patent application on behalf of the 

University or in which the licensee pays the costs of filing the patent application. If after 

270 days an application is not filed, the Associate Vice Chancellor for Research will 

inform the inventor about the cause of any delays or, alternatively, if the University 

determines that it wishes to abandon its efforts to file a patent application, will inform 

the inventor that the University releases its proprietary interest in the invention subject 

to the same conditions that were outlined in Paragraph VI.C.2.  

 

The inventor will almost always be asked to assist by providing necessary information 

concerning any stage of the patent application process; patent examiners frequently 

offer a detailed rejection of all or part of the patent claims, which may require extensive 

written responses until the factual and legal issues are resolved. This process typically 

requires two years or more. Licensing negotiations may commence at any time before, 

during or after the patent application process occurs. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 13 of 14 

E.  Decision to Terminate Proprietary Interest 

Decision to Terminate Proprietary Interest. If, at any stage of the patent application 

process, a decision is made not to continue, the Associate Vice Chancellor for Research 

will notify the inventor, in writing, that the University releases its proprietary rights to 

the inventor provided that all further development of the invention will be at the 

expense of the inventor, on his or her own time, and will not entail the "substantial use 

of University resources." If sponsoring agencies are involved, commitments may also 

need to be resolved between the University and the agency.  

VII. ROYALTIES AND OTHER INCOME  

A. Royalties 

Royalties. If the University receives a patent, negotiates a license agreement, or 

otherwise exploits an invention, the first royalty income will be applied to the 

reimbursement of the out-of-pocket expenses entailed by the Office of Research for 

patenting and licensing the invention. Thereafter, the next $5,000 of royalty income will 

be given to the inventor(s). After the first $5,000 and through the first $100,000 of 

royalty income, the inventor(s) and the University will receive the following proportion 

of the royalties, as long as the payments continue: 45% to the inventor(s), 12.5% to the 

inventor's department, 2.5% to the inventor's dean's office, and 40% to the Office of 

Research. After the first $100,000 of royalty income, the inventor(s) and the University 

will receive the following proportion of the royalties, as long as the payments continue: 

25% to the inventor(s), 20% to the inventor's department, 5% to the inventor's dean's 

office, and 50% to the Office of Research. In all instances, out-of-pocket licensing, 

legal and other related expenses will be deducted before royalty income is distributed to 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 14 of 14 

the inventor(s) and the University. If two or more inventors collaborated on the 

invention and are listed as co-inventors on the patent application, the inventors' share of 

royalties will be distributed in accordance with a letter of agreement which will be 

signed prior to submitting the patent application. This letter of agreement will reflect 

equitably the contribution of each inventor to the invention, and disagreements 

concerning relative contribution to the invention, if any, will be arbitrated by the 

Associate Vice Chancellor for Research. If the inventors are from different schools or 

departments, the departments' share will be distributed in the same relative proportions 

as that of the inventors.  

B.  Other Income 

Other Income. Other income refers to non-royalty income that results from licensing a 

patent or exploiting other forms of technology for the benefit of the inventor and the 

University. Examples include, but are not limited to, non-royalty income from spinoff 

technologies and equity income. The equitable division of these sources of other income 

will be negotiated by all parties concerned will be based on the unique characteristics of 

the commercialization and of the specific technology under consideration.  

  
 


