
The University of Mississippi 
 

Page 1 of 4 
 

Performance Management for Staff Personnel 
 

Summary/purpose:  The purpose of the University’s performance management system is to 

ensure that individual, team, and/or department objectives are being reached efficiently and 

effectively. Effective performance is defined in advance and tools and procedures necessary to 

measure performance are provided.  Performance management requires the supervisor and staff 

member (non-faculty personnel) to have frequent candid discussions about performance 

expectations, established objectives, actual performance, and future development. The 

comparison of actual performance with expectations and standards serves as a basis for 

recognizing accomplishments, fueling performance, and planning for continued progress and 

improvement where deficiencies may be found.  A successful performance management 

program helps retain talented employees, keeps employees engaged, enhances employee 

learning, and builds a successful culture and organization. 

 

Responsibility: 

Every staff member contributes to the overall success of our University.  All staff members, no 

matter how skilled, need opportunities for continued learning and success.  Both employees and 

supervisors have a responsibility to actively participate in the performance management process.  

The process includes planning for performance by setting clearly defined objectives, on-going 

coaching (formal and informal), and highlighting success, while emphasizing the importance of 

follow-through.  This process aligns with the University’s mission, specifically providing 

opportunities for learning, discovery, and engagement. 

 

Representatives of the Department of Human Resources are responsible for the oversight and 

administration of the performance management systems for staff members.  Supervisors of all 

levels with the organization (supervisors, managers, directors, chairs, deans and department 

heads) are responsible for the timely completion of all applicable performance management 

forms including the Probationary Review, Year-long Performance Review, and Progressive 

Discipline Action Notice, if necessary. 

 

Accessing Online Forms: 

The online forms are available, during the appropriate window of time, on the University’s site, 

connectU, at connectu.olemiss.edu, within the “Performance & Engagement” tile as 

programmed. 

 

The Progressive Discipline Action Notice form must be requested.  Supervisors must contact a 

Human Resources manager to request access to the form. 



The University of Mississippi 
 

Page 2 of 4 
 

 

Note:  The Objectives module and tile containing the employees’ objectives are available year 

round. 

 

Probationary Staff Review: 

The probationary period and the probationary staff review should be discussed with the staff 

member at the time of hire. A staff member is eligible for a probationary review after 

completion of three months of service (90 days) and no later than six months of service (unless 

a contractual employee).   

 

Ninety days after the employee’s start date, the online Probationary Staff Review form is made 

available to the supervisor.  The supervisor will receive an email with instructions to access the 

online form on the University’s site, connectU, at connectu.olemiss.edu, within the 

“Performance & Engagement” tile.  

 

The probationary review consists of a brief review of the employee’s performance on general 

job-related objectives.  The supervisor is also encouraged to include an overall comment.   

 

At this time the supervisor may make a decision regarding the staff member’s continued 

employment with the University.  The form will include a published due date seven (7) days 

prior to the sixth month of employment, with additional steps and deadlines programmed to 

ensure the process, including all acknowledgements and approvals, is completed by the sixth 

month of employment.  Failure to complete and submit the review by the sixth month of 

employment will result in automatic continued employment with an updated status of “regular” 

(non-probationary). 

 

If the supervisor determines that additional time is required to assess the employee’s skills, 

abilities, interest and/or performance, the supervisor may request to extend the probationary 

period for an additional period not to exceed a total of twelve months of employment.  The 

request must be communicated to a Human Resources manager and processed on the initial 

Probationary Review Form by the employee’s sixth month of employment (six month 

anniversary date).   If approved, an additional form, Extended Probationary Review, will be 

launched for the next Probationary Review determination. The supervisor will receive an email 

with instructions to access the online form on the University’s site, connectU, at 

connectu.olemiss.edu, within the “Performance & Engagement” tile. The additional requested 

time for the probationary review does not guarantee continued employment for the full 

requested amount of time.  The extension must be requested and granted through the initial 

Probationary Review form. 



The University of Mississippi 
 

Page 3 of 4 
 

 

It is the supervisor’s responsibility to submit the probationary review in a timely manner. 

 

The form is submitted online through connectU program.  After the supervisor submits the 

form, the employee may acknowledge the form and forward the electronic form for the next 

signature, the supervisor’s manager (next level manager). Once received, a Human Resources 

representative will acknowledge receipt and the form will be completed.  A copy of the form is 

retained in each person’s “Completed” folder within the Performance module, accessed through 

the drop down menu.  Refer to the “Probationary Period” policy for further details. 

 

Ongoing Performance Management Communication & Process: 

 

Characteristics of ongoing performance communication include: 

 performance management is a continuing process to assist everyone in enhancing 
performance and development 

 includes milestone dates for periodic monitoring of performance objectives and progress 
reports in objective terms 

 goals or objectives may need to be changed or retargeted during the review period 

 open-communication channels ensure that issues are elevated quickly and resolved 
expeditiously. 

 assists employees who request assistance and those who are failing to meet standards 

 

All regular staff members, including executive staff, are entitled to performance feedback on a 

regular basis. Performance management requires the supervisor and staff member (non-faculty 

personnel) to have frequent candid discussions about performance expectations, actual 

performance, and future development. 

 

The ongoing performance review process is administered on the University’s site, connectU, at 

connectu.olemiss.edu, within the “Performance & Engagement” tile.  The program provides 

opportunities and is flexible allowing employees and supervisors to utilize the program in the 

manner and as frequently as desired. 

 

The performance review cycle is administered on the calendar year and the current review 

period and announced “at the latest” deadlines can be found at 

http://www.hr.olemiss.edu/performance.html.   

On-going and at least quarterly, the supervisor and the staff member should continue a face-to-

face dialog regarding the staff member’s performance.  

 

The contents of the performance review include the pre-established objectives agreed upon by the 

http://www.hr.olemiss.edu/performance.html


The University of Mississippi 
 

Page 4 of 4 
 

employee and supervisor, the University’s core values related competencies, and competencies 

related to the position group type. 

 

The electronic form is made available to the employee and supervisor.  The end of year review 

will also include access for the supervisor’s manager (next level manager) and Human 

Resources. Once received, a Human Resources representative will acknowledge receipt and the 

form will be completed.  A copy of the form is retained in each person’s “Completed” folder 

within the Performance module, accessed through the drop down menu. 

 

Additional information and specific details are available at 

http://www.olemiss.edu/hr/performance.html and http://hr.olemiss.edu/connectu-learning-guides 

 

Progressive Discipline Action Notice: 

 

The University’s progressive discipline policy and procedures are designed to provide a 

structured corrective action process to improve and prevent a recurrence of undesirable 

employee behavior and performance issues. 

 

The University reserves the right to combine or skip steps depending on the facts of each 

situation and the nature of the offense. Some of the factors that will be considered are whether 

the offense is repeated despite coaching, counseling or training; the employee's work record; 

and the impact the conduct and performance issues have on the organization. 

 

After the supervisor has reviewed the performance and/or incident, including discussing the 

concern(s) with the employee, the supervisor must communicate to a human resources manager 

to request access to the electronic progressive discipline action notice.   The supervisor will 

receive an email with instructions to access the online form on the University’s site, connectU, 

at connectu.olemiss.edu, within the “Performance & Engagement” tile within the “To Do” 

section (top of the page).  

 

The electronic form is made available to the supervisor and the employee for 

acknowledgement.  The form will also be routed to the supervisor’s manager (next level 

manager) and Human Resources. Once received, a Human Resources representative will 

acknowledge receipt and the form will be completed.  A copy of the form is retained in each 

person’s “Completed” folder within the Performance module, accessed through the drop down 

menu. Refer to the “Progressive Discipline Action Notice” policy for further details. 

http://www.olemiss.edu/hr/performance.html
http://hr.olemiss.edu/connectu-learning-guides/

