
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Shipping Hazardous Materials 
 
Summary/Purpose:  The Policy on Shipping Hazardous Materials details the procedures and 
requirements to comply with Federal and International regulations to ship Hazardous Materials on 
Commercial Carriers. 
 
 

Shipping Hazardous Materials 

 
Shipping packages containing hazardous materials or dangerous goods will always be an important 
part of the freight business. Likewise, the use of hazardous materials will always be an important 
part of scientific research. On occasion, it becomes necessary to ship hazardous materials to another 
researcher, to another university, to another research facility, or even to a manufacturer. These 
hazardous materials can include compressed gasses, flammable liquids and solids, oxidizers, 
poisons, corrosive materials, radioactive and biological materials and even dry ice.  

Federal hazardous materials regulations (49 CFR parts 171-180) have outlined specific shipping 
requirements for these hazardous materials. If these materials are offered for transport by a 
commercial carrier (FedEx, Airborne, UPS), the shipment becomes regulated by the Department of 
Transportation (DOT) and sometimes by international agencies. When materials are shipped out of 
the country, items that may not be considered hazardous in the United States may be classified as 
hazardous in other countries. To comply with shipping regulations, these hazardous materials must 
be properly classified, documented, packaged, and handled. For shipments of biological and 
radioactive materials, transport or export permits and/or authorization may be required prior to 
shipment.  

Failure to meet these regulatory requirements may result in citations, fines and/or imprisonment. 
Fines to the University can range from $250 to $500,000 per violation. In addition, individual 
researchers and shippers may be subject to criminal penalties of up to $500,000 and five years 
imprisonment. Federal law also requires that anyone who is involved in or responsible for preparing 
or transporting a hazardous material must have DOT training and certification. No one is exempt 
from these federal transportation requirements.  

 
Laboratory Services personnel (5433) will provide assistance with package selection, material 
classification and documentation. It is your responsibility to notify Laboratory Services that you 
wish to ship a hazardous material, and to make an appointment for assistance. Please read and follow 
all directions. 

Shipping Hazardous Materials Is By Appointment Only 

You MUST Contact Laboratory Services  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

AT LEAST One (1) Full Business Day Before You Need To Ship 

To Be Sure Someone Is Available To Assist You 

PLAN AHEAD!! 

 
Please fill out and FAX a Hazardous Materials Transportation and Information Form, then CALL 
FOR AN APPOINTMENT to have a package prepared for transport. You will be issued a 
confirmation number and a shipping confirmation form will be faxed back to you. If you do not 
receive a confirmation fax and confirmation number, you are not scheduled to ship. Contact 
Laboratory Services to complete your paperwork. Certain hazardous materials may require 
additional paperwork, license transfers and administrative approval. PLAN AHEAD!  

 Laboratory Services should be contacted one (1) full business day before you want to ship 
hazardous materials.  

 You must present the hazardous material, the appropriate packaging and either yourself or a 
representative at Laboratory Services no later than 10 minutes after your scheduled 
appointment. If you anticipate tardiness, please call to reschedule. Missed appointments will 
be scheduled for another day / time. 

 Most materials intended for domestic delivery are ready for shipment in 30 minutes or less.  
 AN ADDITIONAL TWO (2) BUSINESS DAY MINIMUM is required for overseas 

packages. It is the responsibility of the shipper/researcher to determine if the material is legal 
for export to the receiving nation. Laboratory Services is not responsible for materials that 
are detained, refused, returned, or destroyed by customs agents. Import/Export fines, charges, 
penalties, remunerations must be paid by the shipper/researcher. The use of a bonding agent 
(a third party specializing in shipping materials to foreign countries) may be required to ship 
materials out of the U.S. 

 Prior arrangements must be made with most carriers to have these materials picked up. Plan 
Ahead Before You Ship Hazardous Materials.  

 If you contact Laboratory Services after 11 AM, it is too late for most companies to schedule 
a pick-up of hazardous materials.  

 In an Emergency, You must contact Laboratory Services no later than 9:30 AM on the day 
that you want to ship hazardous material. If personnel are not available at that time, your 
shipment will be delayed. 

Hazardous materials cannot be picked up at drop-off locations.  

Hazardous materials must be shipped directly from Laboratory Services. 

 

 

REMEMBER TO PLAN AHEAD!! 

 
 


