
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 3 

 

 

Specific Policies for the Enrollment in and Completion of 

Independent Study Courses 
 

1.  To ensure a positive academic experience for our students, the Office of Independent Study 

allows students to enroll in no more than two Independent Study courses at any time. 

 

2.  The School of Business allows Business majors to enroll in only one Independent Study 

course at a time. 

 

3. All University of Mississippi students must have their applications for Independent Study 

courses approved and signed by the Academic Dean of School in which they are majoring. 

 

4.  Students not using Federal Financial Aid to pay for the tuition of their Independent Study 

course(s) have one year to complete their course(s). These students may purchase a maximum of 

two three-month extensions.  

 

5.  Students using Federal Financial Aid to pay the tuition of their Independent Study course(s) 

have until three weeks before the end of the semester in which they enrolled to finish the course. 

They can purchase one two-month extension at that deadline if they have completed at least half 

of the course. 

 

6.  If all extensions have expired before the student has completed the course, a student must re-

enroll in the course at the full price if he/she wishes to receive credit for the course. The 

instructor will decide if the student may continue the course or whether the student must begin 

over. This only applies to University of Mississippi students if the student had not reached the 

mid-point of the course.  

 

7.  Independent Study students must spend a minimum of two months (56 calendar days 

including the registration date) on the course before taking the final exam. The two months begin 

when the first lesson is received in the Independent Study office.  

 

8.  The Independent Study department does not accept “postage due” mail. 

 

9.  Students may withdraw from an Independent Study course by submitting permission to 

withdraw in writing. An 80% refund is given if the withdrawal is received in the Independent 

Study office within 30 days of the application. 

 

10.  A student may transfer an enrollment from one course to another for $25 provided no more 

than three lessons have been submitted and the transfer is requested within two months of 

enrollment. 

 

11.  Non-University of Mississippi students may withdraw from a course at any time prior to 

taking the final exam with no academic penalty for withdrawal.  

 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 3 

 

12.  Once a University of Mississippi student reaches the midpoint of an Independent Study 

course, he/she cannot withdraw from the course and will receive a grade {A, B, C, D, or F} for 

the course. 

 

13.  If a student has a question regarding a course, he/she should forward that question to the 

Department of Independent Study and not contact the professor directly. 

 

14.  Independent Study students must pass the final examination to pass the course. 

 

15.  Independent Study students are not charged out-of-state tuition. 

 

16.  No information concerning grades will be given out over the phone or in email.   

 

17.  No information about a student or a student’s progress will be given out to anyone but the 

student, unless the student has given written permission for that information to be shared with 

that individual or entity. 

 

18.  Independent Study students may not take their final examination until all their lessons have 

been graded. 

 

19.  Independent Study courses are not accepted as graduate credit at the University of 

Mississippi. 

 

20.  Independent Study students may send as many as two lessons per day, but not more than 

four in a seven-day period. 

 

21.   Liberal Arts majors may not take Foreign Language Independent Study courses without 

special permission from the Liberal Arts Advising Dean. 

 

22.   Students must submit the Mid-Course Test Application form and the Final Exam 

Application form before requesting an appointment for proctoring. 

 

23.   Students residing in Mississippi write tests and examinations at one of the approved 

examination centers in the state.   

 

24.  Students not in Mississippi must use a proctor that is approved by the Department of 

Independent Study.   

 

25.  The Department of Independent Study reserves the right to reject any testing supervisor and 

to require the student to come to the Oxford campus to write the test. 

 

26.  Students taking Independent Study courses who plan to use Federal Financial Aid must:   

 

a.  Apply for the course at the beginning of the semester in a window which begins 

one week before courses begin and closes two weeks after courses begin. 

b.  Sign the Department of Financial Aid’s letter of acceptance. 

c.  Complete the course by the deadline date, which is three weeks before the end of 

the semester. 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 3 of 3 

 

d.  They may request one two-month extension of their course. 

 

27.  If a student is attempting to meet a deadline to receive a final grade for their course (i.e., 

graduation or the end of a semester), he/she must complete all requirements, including the final 

examination, at least three weeks before the deadline date.  

 

 


