
The University of Mississippi 
 

 

Payment for Personal Services as a Consultant or Independent 

Contractor 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The existence of an employer-employee relationship between an individual 

and the University determines whether an individual may be paid as a consultant or independent 

contractor. Primary guidelines used to determine whether an employer-employee relationship 

exists are listed on the e-form 13. 

 
The existence of an employer-employee relationship between an individual and the University 

determines whether an individual can be paid as a consultant or independent contractor. If an 

employer-employee relationship exists, the individual must be employed and paid through the 

payroll system.  Otherwise, the individual may be paid as a consultant or independent contractor. 

Primary guidelines used to determine if an employer-employee relationship exists are listed on 

the e-form 13. 

 
Departments are encouraged to have on file a Letter of Agreement or similar written agreement 

detailing the services the consultant or independent contractor is responsible for performing if 

the fee for services is over $5,000.00.  Consulting relationships regardless of the amount of the 

fee  for  services  with  a  scope  of  work  related  to  a  sponsored  research  project  or  to  the 

development of a University technology must be conducted under a Consulting Agreement 

negotiated and approved by the Office of Research and Sponsored Programs.   The signatory 

agent for such Consulting Agreements is the Vice Chancellor of Research and Sponsored 

Programs and the University employee closest to the project will be required to sign the 

Consulting Agreement as “acknowledged by.”  The Consulting Agreement must be executed in 

advance of submission of e-form 13. 

 
The Procurement Services Department requires the advertising of an RFP for services over 

$50,000.00 unless the signatory officer or principal investigator provides a written justification 

for “sole source” or “research” when the e-form 13 is submitted. 

 

In accordance with IHL Board of Trustees Policy 707.01, Mississippi Institutions of Higher 

Learning (IHL) Board approval is required for all leases, certain revenue contracts, and all 

contracts that require a total expenditure of more than $250,000.   

 
State law prohibits an employee of the University from being a contractor of the University 

while they are an employee.  Employees who intend to perform extra work beyond their normal 

duties must consult Human Resources prior to doing the work to discuss whether or not the work 

can be done and the proper method of payment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


