
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Rental Car 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Justification and use of rental cars while in travel status 

 

The University will allow use of rental cars when there is a demonstrated cost saving over other 

modes of transportation and use of the rental car is not strictly for the traveler’s convenience.  

If an employee uses a rental car instead of a private vehicle for travel to their destination, state 

guidelines require documentation of the total rental expense compared to the total mileage 

expense from using a private vehicle.  Reimbursement of the lesser expense shall be claimed on 

the Travel Reimbursement Voucher. 

 

Please remember than an intermediate size vehicle is normally the largest rental that will be 

reimbursed.  Naturally, there will be occasions for which a larger vehicle will be required.  A 

waiver request form should be submitted for approval to the Office of Procurement Services 

prior to making any reservations. 

 

If a state travel agency is used to make rental car reservations with the rental agency, the state 

travel agency will send the traveler a confirmation of the reservation and the rate. Upon arriving 

at the destination if a more economical rate is found with another agency, that agency may be 

used without approval from the state travel agent. Make sure all charges that will be assessed by 

the other rental agency are known in order to determine which rate is actually the lowest. To 

document the lower rate when filing for reimbursement, attach the original confirmation from the 

state travel agent and the receipt for the actual car rental to the Travel Reimbursement Voucher. 

 

In State and Out of State Rental Car Contracts 

For current In-State and Out-Of-State contracts please visit the Travel website.  The Corporate 

ID’s are listed on the contracts for each vendor and need to be used in order to obtain our 

contracted rate, unlimited mileage, and free Collision Damage Waiver/Loss Damage Waiver 

insurance coverage.   

 

Rental Car Contract Insurance 

The current vehicle rental contracts include unlimited mileage and free CDW/LDW insurance.   

The option to purchase insurance should always be declined when a vehicle is rented 

utilizing the state contract.  Insurance purchases will not be reimbursed as per the above 

information. 

 

The following conditions justify use of rental cars: 

 When the traveler reaches the destination by commercial carrier and several places 
within the area must be visited. 

 When transportation between commercial carrier terminal and the hotel or meeting place 
is needed and a taxi or a limousine is not available. 

 When a commercial carrier cannot meet the traveler’s schedule. 
 

The following usage of a rental car will not be reimbursed: 

 Rental of a vehicle for personal use, such as sightseeing. 

 Optional travel to and from restaurants while on official state business. 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/travel/

