
Page 1 of 1 

 

The University of Mississippi 

 

Statement Concerning Academic Freedom 
 

The University of Mississippi is a community of teachers and students bound together by a 

common love for learning and by their cooperative efforts to preserve and increase their 

intellectual heritage. Good learning increases, minds are creative, and knowledge is turned to 

useful purposes when men and women are free to question and seek for answers, free to learn, 

and free to teach.   

 

The teacher, therefore, is entitled to freedom in research and in the publication of his/her results, 

subject to the adequate performance of his/her other academic duties. The teacher is entitled to 

freedom in the classroom in discussing his/her subject, but he/she should be careful not to 

introduce into his/her teaching controversial matter which has no relation to his/her subject. All 

members of the faculty, whether tenured or nontenured, enjoy this same academic freedom, with 

the rights and responsibilities which the term implies. 

 

The university teacher is a citizen, a member of a learned profession, and an officer of an 

educational institution. When he/she speaks or writes as a citizen, he/she should be free from 

institutional censorship or discipline, but his/her special position in the community imposes 

special obligations. As a person of learning and an educational officer, he/she should remember 

that the public may judge his/her profession and his/her institution by his/her utterances. Hence, 

he/she should strive at all times to be accurate, should exercise appropriate restraint, should show 

respect for the opinions of others, and should make every effort to indicate that he/she is not an 

institutional spokesperson.   

 

The University of Mississippi endorses the 1940 Statement of Principles on Academic Freedom 

and Tenure of the American Association of University Professors, as revised and refined since 

1940, and also the Statement on Professional Ethics of the same organization, insofar as these are 

not limited by State law or the policies of the Mississippi Board of Trustees of State Institutions 

of Higher Learning. 

 


