
USE OF THE PROCUREMENT CARD 
 
The following are the minimum conditions/instructions/limitations required for all 
transactions utilizing The University of Mississippi Small Purchase Procurement Card:  
 

1. No procurement card transactions may exceed $5,000.00.  

 

2. State contract items shall not be purchased using the procurement card unless 

the contract vendor is being used. A list of mandatory state contracts can be 

found at  http://www.dfa.ms.gov/dfa-offices/purchasing-travel-and-fleet-

management/purchasing-and-travel/contracts/ 

 

3. No personal use of the procurement cards will be authorized or allowed. Based 

on apparel guidelines set forth by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) clothing 

items (monogrammed polos, khakis, shoes, etc) are not to be purchased using 

any university funds, unless:  

A.  The employee must wear the clothes as a condition of employment.  
B.  The clothes are not suitable for everyday wear.  
C.  The University retains the clothing after termination of employment.  

 

4. No ATM cash withdrawals will be allowed on the procurement card.  

5.  Only in-stock, immediate deliver items may be purchased. NO BACK ORDERS. 
        Verify phone orders are in stock and ready for immediate shipment.  
 

6. Orders must be invoiced ONLY at or after the date of shipment. An example 

recordkeeping log is provided for your convenience.  

 

7. Procurement card purchases are exempt from Mississippi state and local taxes.  

 

8. All purchases are to be made within the limits set and available budget authority.  

 

9. All equipment purchased must be either shipped or brought, along with the 

invoice, to Central Receiving so that property barcodes can be placed on the 

equipment items. Then the barcode number must be written on the VISA 

document and the purchase must be coded with the correct g/l code when 

posting the VISA document. Failure to include the barcode number will render 

your document incomplete and subject to suspension. A list of exception items is 

provided.  

 

http://www.dfa.ms.gov/dfa-offices/purchasing-travel-and-fleet-management/purchasing-and-travel/contracts/
http://www.dfa.ms.gov/dfa-offices/purchasing-travel-and-fleet-management/purchasing-and-travel/contracts/


10. The procurement card shall not be used for travel and travel related expenses,      

but may be used for allowable food purchases if a detailed itemized receipt, list 

of persons attending, and the purpose of the meal are provided. Alcoholic 

beverages are not an allowable expense. The tip shall not exceed 20% 

(unless mandated by the restaurant) of the pre-tax amount. The average cost 

per person should not exceed $30.00. If the average cost per person exceeds 

$30.00, the VISA document must be approved by the Provost or appropriate vice 

chancellor. 

 

11.  No fuel for vehicles.  

 

12. The procurement card shall not be used for the payment of personal/professional 

services of a consultant/contractor/individual as these must be processed on an 

electronic Form 13.  

 

13. The cardholder should obtain itemized transaction receipts from the merchant for 

each use of the card.  

  

14.  The cardholder should ensure that the prices paid are fair and reasonable.  

 

15.  All items purchased are required to be for bona fide University purposes.  

 

16. The cardholder should ensure that surcharges (processing fees) are not   

charged in the procurement card. During the 2013 Legislative Session an 

amendment to MS code 31-7-9 was passed which states that a vendor shall not 

impose a surcharge on a buyer who uses a state-issued credit card, procurement 

card, travel card, or fuel card.  

What does this mean for the procurement card users? Simply stated it means, 
that a vendor cannot charge a surcharge when you are making a purchase with 
the procurement card. You will need to inform the vendor of this new 
amendment if they impose the surcharge. If a vendor is not willing to comply, 
please inform them they are breaking Mississippi state law and if they insist on 
imposing a surcharge, please use another vendor. 

 


