
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Autoclave Safety 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Autoclave Safety Policy details the minimum requirements and 
procedures for the safe operation of Autoclaves. 

Autoclaves use superheated steam to sterilize materials and supplies for laboratory use and to 
prepare contaminated items for disposal. Because there are several brands and types of machines, 
it is the responsibility of the laboratory supervisor to properly train all of the personnel in the 
safe operation of the specific type of autoclave they are using. As a general rule the following 
table can be used as a guide for preparation and disposal. For specific techniques, more or less 
time, temperature, and pressure may be used as designated by the Principal Investigator (PI).  

Program Temperature Time Drying Time Items To be Sterilized 

Liquids 
121° C  

(250° F) 
15 minutes None 

Distilled water, media solutions, other liquid 
prepared in closed bottles or flasks (not 
greater than 2 liters). Not for clinical 
applications 

Unwrapped 
135° C  

(275 °F) 
3 minutes

Default:  
15 minutes,  
can be set from 
1 to 99 minutes

Unwrapped instruments: metal glass and 
plastic objects. Heat resistant rubber tubing 
which will not be used in surgical 
applications. Any other items for which 135° 
C for 3 minutes is appropriate 

Wrapped 
135° C  

(275 °F) 
10 minutes

Default:  
15 minutes,  
can be set from 
1 to 99 minutes

Wrapped cloths, bandages, pads, fabrics, 
loosely wrapped individual instruments 
separated by fabric, wrapped trays of loose 
instruments, instruments in bags, heat-
resistant rubber tubing. Any other items for 
which 135° C for 10 minutes is appropriate. 

Packs 
121° C  

(250 °F) 
30 minutes

Default:  
15 minutes,  
can be set from 
1 to 99 minutes

Packs of towels. Groups of instruments in 
commercially prepared packs. Instruments 
subject to prolonged storage. Surgical gloves 
wrapped for sterilization. Any other items for 
which 121° C for 30 minutes is appropriate, 
except liquids 

Optional 
User defined  

From 100 °C to 136 °C 
(212 °F to 277 °F) 

User 
defined  

User defined 1 
to 99 minutes 

Items appropriate to the user defined 
parameters. Dental handpieces should be run 
in this cycle at 132° C for 10 minutes. 

When using any type of autoclave, a few general rules must always be followed to 
insure its safe operation.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

 Never attempt to open the door while the machine is operating.  
 Always check the jacket pressure gauge to make sure that it is reading 0 PSI before 

opening the door.  
 Do not overfill containers when autoclaving liquids.  
 Use a catch basin to capture overflow when autoclaving any materials.  
 Periodically check chamber trap and clean as necessary.  
 When preparing materials for disposal, do not autoclave more than can easily be placed 

in an appropriate disposal container.  
 If the machine is not operating properly, notify the laboratory supervisor. Do Not 

Attempt To Make Repairs. This should be done only by a trained technician.  

Laboratory Services (5433) tests all operational autoclaves biannually, and as needed after major 
repairs, to ensure proper operation.  

 

 


