
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 8 

Copyright 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To designate the University of Mississippi policy for intellectual property 
rights as they pertain to copyrights. 
 
 

Preamble 
 The University of Mississippi (UM) strongly affirms its commitment to provide an 
environment that supports the generation and dissemination of knowledge for the public good.  
UM embraces the long-standing academic tradition that the institution, the public, and the author 
are well served when scholarly, aesthetic, and pedagogical pursuits result in the sharing of 
knowledge with colleagues and the public through formats traditional to academe, such as 
scholarly books or articles, papers at professional conferences, works of art and musical 
compositions, and textbooks.  UM is pleased to share in the prestige accorded the creators of 
such materials and endorses the belief that the institution and the public it serves benefit from the 
stimulating educational environment encouraged by their creation and publication.   
 
 UM also recognizes that changes in technology and society both reflect and result in 
changes in the role of the University and its personnel, and in the responsibility of the institution 
to the public it serves.  Increasingly, outcomes of research have potential for success in a 
commercial as well as an academic sphere, a potential whose realization offers benefits in 
addition to the enhancement of education and research but whose development requires 
extensive and directed support.  UM acknowledges its obligation to its researchers to make this 
support available and its obligation to the State of Mississippi to contribute to the economic 
development of the state and to the financial health of this institution.  UM therefore has the 
responsibility both to promote the commercial development of research outcomes and to share in 
the benefits of commercial success.  Further, UM has the responsibility to protect the academic 
traditions that have so long and so well served institutions of higher education.   
 
 The University of Mississippi Copyright Policy is based on the belief that these 
responsibilities are not in conflict; rather, together, they offer new and renewed opportunities, 
energies, and directions.  UM accepts an active role in promoting the development of 
copyrightable materials in a manner consistent with public interest, and acknowledges that public 
interest requires both academic excellence and responsible fiscal management.  This Policy is 
written with the intention of promoting excellent, innovative research by identifying and 
protecting the rights of the University, its personnel, and the public. 
 
 

Foundation and Scope of the UM Copyright Policy 
United States Copyright law designates the employer as the owner of copyrightable work 

prepared by employees within the scope of their employment. UM elects to relinquish its claim 
to ownership of certain of those materials (as identified later in this policy), in keeping with 
academic tradition and in pursuit of an appropriate public good.  This University of Mississippi 
Copyright Policy identifies the copyrightable materials to which UM will exercise its rights and 
establishes procedures for determining and protecting those rights.  Ownership of materials not 
described in this policy can be assumed to belong to the creator. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 8 

 
 

Definitions 
Copyright:  The exclusive right to reproduce, prepare derivative works from, distribute copies, 
transfer ownership (by rental, lease, or lending), perform publicly, or display publicly the 
copyrighted work, or to authorize another person to perform any of those actions. 
 
Copyrightable Materials:  Materials subject to copyright protection are original works of 
authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression now known or later developed, from 
which they can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or with the 
aid of a machine or device.  Works of authorship include literary works; musical works 
(including accompanying words); dramatic works (including accompanying music); pantomimes 
and choreographic works; pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works; motion picture and other 
audiovisual works; sound recordings; and architectural works.  Copyright protection does not 
extend to ideas, procedures, processes, systems, methods of operation, concepts, principles or 
discoveries, even when presented in copyrightable form. 
 
Creation of Copyrightable Materials:  A copyrightable work is “created” when it is fixed in a 
tangible medium from which it can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either 
directly or with the aid of a machine or device. 
 
Creator/Creators:  The term designates the individual, group, department, or unit creating the 
copyrightable material. 
 
Externally Sponsored Works:  Externally Sponsored Works are projects supported financially by 
non-University (external) entities through such mechanisms as grants, contracts, and cooperative 
agreements.   
 
Fair Use:  Fair Use of a copyrighted work for purposes such as criticism, comment, news 
reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research is not 
an infringement of copyright.  In determining whether “fair use” has been made of a work in any 
particular case, other factors to be considered will include the following:  the purpose and 
character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit 
educational purposes; the nature of the copyrighted work; the amount and substantiality of the 
portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and the effect of the use upon the 
potential market for or value of the copyrighted work. 
 
Income:  Income refers to any form of income resulting from the exercise of rights exclusive to 
the copyright owner, including but not limited to income derived from the sale, distribution, or 
licensing of copyrighted materials. 
 
Public Domain:  A work is said to be placed “in the public domain” when it is made available for 
use by anyone at anytime, without explicit authorization or restrictions on use.  A work in the 
public domain is outside copyright protection. 
 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 8 

Student:  The term “Student” refers to any full-time or part-time undergraduate or graduate 
student, regardless of whether the student receives financial aid or remuneration in any form 
from UM. 
 
Substantial Use:  Substantial Use of University resources occurs when development or creation 
involves the use of University resources beyond the following:  

1. customary use of assigned office space, laboratories, or studios, or of libraries; of 
library collections, subscriptions or services; of secretarial or other staff assistance; of 
computer time or computer or lab equipment on hand; of network or Internet access; 
of standard office equipment and supplies. 

2. sabbaticals; summer or other research grants provided by the University or 
University-affiliated units; other support customarily provided to faculty and staff. 

 
Transfer of Ownership:  Transfer of ownership occurs after copyright has been obtained and may 
apply to any or all of the exclusive rights granted copyright owners.  The written agreement of 
transferal must be signed by both parties to a transferal.  The transfer of copyright ownership 
may be recorded in the U.S. Copyright Office.  
 
UM Personnel:  The term “UM Personnel” includes all faculty and staff with full, part-time, or 
adjunct status, and any other employee, agent, or Fellow of the University, during the course of 
employment. 
 
University:  “University” refers to The University of Mississippi at its Oxford campus and those 
locations administered from the Oxford campus. 
 

 
Student Work 

The University makes no claim to copyright ownership of works created by students working on 
their own, i.e., not within the scope of an employment relationship with the University or with 
one of its employees, and not making Substantial Use of University resources. 
 
1. Students working on a project governed by a contract or agreement to which the University is 

a party shall be bound by the terms of that contract or agreement. 
 
2. Students who are hired to perform specific tasks that contribute to a copyrightable work will 

ordinarily have no rights to ownership of that work, regardless of the source of funds from 
which they are paid.  In such cases, the party who owns the copyright of the rest of the work 
will ordinarily retain copyright ownership of the portion contributed by the student. 

 
3. Students working collaboratively with University employees on projects that result in 

copyrightable work may be granted the same rights and obligations of copyright ownership 
as would another University employee working collaboratively on the project.  Students and 
University employees should establish these rights at the outset of their collaboration. 

 
4. Students may also be subject to rules and restrictions of their unit or of the Graduate School 

that are not inconsistent with the University Copyright Policy.  For example, students who 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 8 

copyright their theses or dissertations must grant the University rights to reproduce and 
distribute copies of their works in accordance with the policies of the University, College, 
School, Department, or other unit. 

 
Ownership of Copyright 

 It is traditional at The University of Mississippi and other universities, for copyrightable 
works of a faculty member to be deemed the property of the creator, who is considered to be 
entitled to determine how the works are to be disseminated and to keep any income they 
produce. This tradition reflects the University's commitment to encourage members of the 
University of Mississippi community to write and to publish what they wish. 
 
 The University recognizes that changes made to the Copyright Law in 1976, its amendments 
and cases interpreting it have made parts of the law of copyright ownership unclear.  In order to 
remove any doubt cast by the lack of clarity in the law and in recognition of our longstanding 
practice and tradition, The University disclaims any ownership interest in the copyright of works 
created by faculty, staff, postdoctoral fellows and postdoctoral associates and students, whether 
in traditional or nontraditional forms, except in the following cases: 

Supervised Works: The University will own the copyright to works created  
(i) by student employees in the course of their assigned duties of employment, including 

duties as teaching or research assistants, or  
(ii) by faculty members, staff members or postdoctoral fellows or associates as part of an 

assigned task where the University  
(a) specifically assigns an individual to create a particular work or 
(b) selects or supervises choice of subject matter and supervises content, course, and 

direction of the effort to create the work or retains editorial control over the final 
work product. 

 
Supported Works:  In the event that Substantial Use of University resources is involved, the 

creator and the University will share copyright ownership.  Reimbursement of Substantial 
Use costs and/or a division of royalties may be required.  

 
Externally Sponsored Works:  Where copyrighted materials are developed by an investigator 

in the course of sponsored research funded by an outside agency, ownership of the 
copyright will be determined by the applicable terms of the funding agreement.  The 
University reserves the right to seek copyright ownership for itself and/or its employees 
as appropriate during negotiation of the award or externally sponsored program.  If the 
agreement is silent on copyright ownership, then the creator of the work will have full 
ownership of the copyright in any works created in the course of sponsored research. 

 
Commercial Development of Works 

 The University reserves the right to develop commercially any work in which it owns or 
shares ownership of the copyright.  
 
 When UM is the sole owner of the copyright in the work, it has the sole right to 
• determine whether to register the copyright, to take other action to protect its interests, or to 

place the material in the public domain; 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 8 

• determine the manner in which the material is to be distributed to or used by others; 
• determine the charges (if any) for use of the materials; 
• decide to assign title to the creator, or to a third party. 
 When UM and the creator share ownership of the copyright, both owners have the right to 
register the work, to grant nonexclusive licenses to use the work, and to assign their interests in 
ownership to a third party.  
 When ownership to copyright vests in the creator, the creator may choose to assign any or all 
rights in the copyrightable material to UM or to a third party.  UM may require the creator to 
assign partial ownership of the copyright to the University in exchange for assistance in 
commercially developing and exploiting a work.  Copyright law requires that all assignments 
must be made in writing and must be signed by the assignor.  Agreements affecting ownership 
interests in copyrights should specify the division of proceeds from the work between the 
University and the creator. 
 
 UM is obligated to make timely determination of its interest in registering the copyright in 
any work in which it owns or shares ownership of the copyright.  UM is further obligated to 
demonstrate due diligence in efforts to commercialize UM-owned copyrightable materials, or to 
release all or part of its interest to the creator. Should UM fail to demonstrate due diligence, the 
creator has the right to request in writing that copyright be assigned to him/her or to a specified 
third party. Such a request will be made to the Vice Chancellor for Research. 
 
 If UM decides not to continue efforts to commercialize and/or market the materials, the Vice 
Chancellor for Research will notify the creator in writing. The creator then has the right to 
request that copyright be assigned to him/her or to a specified third party. The notification in 
writing will include the understanding that further efforts to commercialize and/or market the 
materials will be at the creator's expense, on his/her own time, and will involve no Substantial 
Use of University resources. 
 
 The University will consult or provide a reasonable opportunity for the creator’s consultation 
with respect to use made of a copyrighted work within the University or before any license for its 
use outside of the University is granted.  UM will make every effort to involve the creator(s) in 
consultations regarding distribution, sale, and/or marketing of University-owned copyrightable 
materials. 
 
 
 Reimbursement of Costs and Royalty Sharing 
 As a general policy, when Substantial Use of University resources has been provided in 
support of the production and/or commercialization of a work, 20% of the gross proceeds will be 
retained by the creator and 80% of the gross proceeds will be returned to the University until the 
University has been reimbursed for all Substantial Use of University resources provided for 
producing and marketing the work.  Once the University has been reimbursed for Substantial 
Use expenses, royalties will be divided between the creator and the University as follows: 
 a) the first $10,000 to the creator; 

b) to the creator(s), a total of 
(i) 60% of the first $100,000 in gross revenues over $10,000;  
(ii) 50% of the gross revenues thereafter.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 6 of 8 

c) to the creator’s Department or Unit 
(i) 20% of the first $100,000 in gross revenues over $10,000;  
(ii) 25% of the gross revenues thereafter.  

 d) to the creator’s School or College 
(i) 2.5% of the first $100,000 in gross revenues over $10,000; 
(ii) 5% of the gross revenues thereafter. 

 e) to the University’s Office of Research a total of 
(i) 17.5% of the first $100,000 in gross revenues over $10000;  
(ii) 20% of the gross revenues thereafter. 

In the case of a School/College comprising only one department, the revenues assignable to the 
Department/Unit go to the School/College.  In the case of a Department/Unit not reporting to a 
School/College, the Department/Unit receives the revenues assignable to the School/College. 
 
For purposes of the paragraph above, in the case of joint creators, the direct royalty distribution 
designated for a creator shall be to the joint creators as a group, to be divided equally between 
the creators, unless the creators provide the University with an alternative royalty distribution 
schedule agreed upon by them. If the creators are associated with different units, the royalty 
distribution to the units shall be to the units jointly to be divided equally, unless the University is 
provided with an alternative royalty distribution schedule agreed upon by the heads of the 
respective units and the Provost or his or her designee. 
 
 
 University Nonexclusive License to Use Work for Instructional Purposes 
 University of Mississippi faculty, staff, postdoctoral fellows and postdoctoral associates and 
students, as a condition of employment or admission to the University, agree to grant the 
University a free nonexclusive right to use any work that they create in connection with their 
employment or matriculation at the University for instructional purposes.   
 
 Procedures 
Disclosure 
 Materials are copyrightable at the time the work is created in a fixed form. In the case of 
supervised works, therefore, ownership vests in the University at that point. It is the 
responsibility of the University employee who assigned a supervised work to the creator to 
inform the University of the possible creation of a copyrightable work to which UM has or may 
have a claim. Disclosure of the creation must be in writing, submitted to the Vice Chancellor for 
Research with copies to the creator's department chair/unit director and dean/division head, with 
sufficient detail about the work and its creation to allow determination of ownership. 
 
 When Substantial Use of University resources is provided which may lead to the creation of 
a supported work, it is the responsibility of the department chair or unit director to notify the 
faculty or staff member, the Dean or Division Head, and the Vice Chancellor for Research in 
writing that the assistance to be provided may constitute Substantial Use.  In cases where the 
creator is the signatory officer of a department or other unit, he/she must notify his/her 
immediate superior and the Vice Chancellor for Research.  It is then the responsibility of the 
creator to notify the department chair or unit director, the Dean or Division Head, and the Vice 
Chancellor for Research when a work is created in fixed form that relies upon Substantial Use of 
University resources. 
 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 7 of 8 

Determination of Ownership 
 Personnel of the Office of Research will acknowledge receipt of the Disclosure of creation of 
a work, request more information if necessary, examine the work and the Disclosure, and review 
the work's copyrightability, commercial potential, and UM interest. Within 45 calendar days of 
receipt of the Disclosure, the Vice Chancellor for Research will make a determination regarding 
UM's interest in the work and will notify the creator in writing of the determination, with copies 
to the creator's department chair/unit director and dean/division head. If it is determined that UM 
has an ownership interest in the copyright of the work but does not wish to pursue its rights, 
notification to the creator will include the understanding that further development of the work 
will be at the expense of the creator, on his/her own time, and with no further Substantial Use of 
University resources. 
 
Release of University Interest in Copyright 
 If the Office of Research does not wish to register the copyright  and pursue commercial 
exploitation of a work in which it has an ownership interest in the copyright, the employee may 
obtain a written release from the Chancellor and may then register the copyright in the work 
entirely in his/her own name. Upon written request for release by the employee, the Office of 
Research will respond within 45 calendar days. 
 
Appeals 
 If the creator disagrees with a determination that UM owns or shares an ownership interest in 
the copyright to the work, the creator may appeal in writing to the Provost, who will refer the 
issue to the University Copyright Appeals Committee.  The appeal must outline  

(a) the circumstances under which the copyrightable materials were created and developed 
and  

(b) the creator's official duties, as given on his/her contract with UM or as otherwise assigned 
at the time of the creation of the materials.  

Any appeal must be made within 45 calendar  days of receipt of the Determination of 
Ownership.   The Committee will make a decision within 45 calendar days of receipt of the 
appeal. Copies of the appeal and the decision must be provided to the Provost, the Office of 
Research, the creator's department chair/unit director and dean/division head and the creator. 
 
 University Copyright Appeals Committee 
 The University shall have a standing University Copyright Appeals Committee that shall 
consider and investigate disputes among administrators, faculty, or staff and shall recommend 
appropriate solutions to the Provost. The Committee's responsibilities shall include, but not be 
limited to, disputes concerning: 

1. whether Substantial Use of University Resources has occurred; 
2. ownership of  works which may be supervised, supported or externally sponsored 

works; 
3. distribution of royalties, including determination of the amount of reimbursement to 

the University in cases of Substantial Use. 
 

Variations from the Policy 
 From time to time, it may be in the best interests of the creator and the University to enter into 
an agreement concerning copyright ownership or commercial development of a work that differs 
from the terms of this policy.  In all such cases, the agreement must be in writing and signed by 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 8 of 8 

the creator, the dean or department head, the Vice Chancellor for Research  and the Provost.  
Such agreements should be concluded as soon as practical in the development of the work to 
protect the interests of both parties and to prevent misunderstandings. 

  
Originality 

    It is the responsibility of the creator to ensure that copyrightable materials are original and 
that, where use is made of copyrighted materials owned by others, the rights of copyright owners 
have been observed.  In the case of materials to which the University owns or -shares copyright, 
UM assumes that the materials as created are original or that use within the work of materials 
copyrighted by others has constituted “fair use” as it is defined by U.S. Copyright Law, or that 
the written consent of the copyright owners has been obtained. 
 
 

Agreement to the UM Copyright Policy 
    This Policy is binding on the University and on its employees as a condition of their 
employment at the University.  The University may choose to implement formal agreement 
procedures, but this Policy is valid and applicable when approved by the Chancellor and the 
Board of Trustees. 
 

Effective Date of Policy 
 This policy shall become effective upon signing of the next year’s employment contracts or 
the beginning of the next academic year after adoption or approval by the IHL Board. 
 
 


