
The University of Mississippi 

FIRE SAFETY 

Purpose/Summary: This policy defines the fire safety expectations for student housing 

residents. The policy also provides a list of banned items that pose fire safety threats. 

 

Flammable items are not permitted due to inherent fire hazards. Because of the potential hazard that all 

candles pose, whether they are burned or unburned, ordinary or decorative, they are not permitted in 

residential facilities. Candles found in student rooms/apartment units will be confiscated, and the 

resident(s) of the rooms/apartment units will be charged $25 per candle and will be subject to 

disciplinary action. All confiscated items will be removed from students’ rooms and disposed of 

appropriately by student housing staff. 

Students are asked to bring appliances and hair equipment (curling irons and straighteners) that have an 

automatic turn-off feature. In addition, the following items are not allowed in residential facilities due to 

risk of fire: 

 

 Candles 

 Incense 

 Deep fryers 

 Electric skillets 

 Toaster ovens 

 Convection ovens 

 Coffee pots with hot plates 

 Oil popcorn poppers 

 Crockpots 

 Space heaters 

 Live Christmas trees 

 Fireworks 

 Grills, indoor and outdoor 

 Motorized vehicles including scooters, electronic skateboards, self-balancing boards/scooters, 
and other similar equipment 

 Hazardous flammable materials (gas, propane, lighter fluid, chemicals, etc.) 

 Paper and/or fabric covering more than 30% of the wall 

 Halogen lamps 

 Any appliance with an open coil or open flame 

 Microwaves over 1,000 watts 

 Refrigerators over 4.2 cubic feet 
 

Tampering with fire safety equipment is not allowed and includes but is not limited to the following 

activities: pulling false alarms, discharging fire extinguishers, removing exit signs, and interfering with 

smoke detectors and sprinklers. Students found responsible will be assessed for all damages that occur 

as a result of their actions and for the hourly rate of the repair person’s labor. In addition, responsible 

students will be subject to judicial action and possible criminal prosecution. The civil penalty for 

malicious use of fire and safety equipment is up to a $500 fine and/or 90 days in jail. 



 

There is a fire extinguisher located in or around each apartment. If a fire extinguisher is used, residents 

should report it to maintenance so that appropriate action can be taken. Appropriate billing of charges 

will occur in cases of fire where residents are found to be negligent or in violation of fire extinguisher 

use policies. 

 

Fire alarms have been installed throughout the residential facilities for student safety. In the event that a 

fire alarm sounds, students must leave the building immediately through the nearest exits. Residents 

should become familiar with the evacuation diagram located on each hallway. In the event of a fire 

alarm or fire, residents must remain outside of the building until allowed to return to the building by fire 

department and/or student housing staff. Residents who remain in the residence halls after an alarm has 

sounded are subject to arrest and University judicial action.  

 

Intentionally causing a false fire alarm is considered a serious infraction and will be dealt with 

accordingly. The fire department responds to all fire alarms regardless of their origin and the cost is 

charged to the student housing department. 


