
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) 
 
Summary/Purpose:  The Polychlorinated Biphenyls Policy details the minimum requirements 
and procedures to Identify, Mark, Collect, Store and Dispose of materials containing, or 
potentially containing, Polychlorinated Biphenyls. 
 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB's) is an oily mixture that was primarily used in older model 
T12 magnetic Fluorescent Light Ballasts (FLBs) which were manufactured years ago. The 
Environmental Protection Agency prohibited the manufacture, importation or reuse of the 
materials in 1979 after studies showed that these materials may be toxic to humans, fish and 
birds.  

Under an energy management project, all of the fluorescent lamp ballasts on the Ole Miss 
campus were changed in the summer of 2000. Many of the ballasts were suspected of containing 
PCB's. The ballasts were collected and shipped to a recycling facility where they were 
dismantled, valuable components and metals were collected, and the PCB suspect components 
were sent off for Incineration. In all, Laboratory Services shipped in excess of 106,000 pounds of 
capacitors and lamp products for recycling and incineration.  

Although every effort was made to remove and replace all FLBs (primarily for energy 
conservation), it is possible that some ballasts were overlooked during this massive renovation 
project.  

The following steps should guide maintenance workers in identifying, removing and 
securing PCB suspected ballasts for disposal through Laboratory Services.  

Maintenance personnel who remove ballasts from fixtures are required to examine the ballast for 
PCB's to determine if they could possibly contain PCB's. If contamination is suspected, workers 
must place the ballast into a container supplied by Laboratory Services, assure that the container 
is properly labelled, and notify Laboratory Services when a container is full.  

Examine the ballast for PCB's.  

 FLBs manufactured before July 1, 1979 may contain PCBs 
 FLBs manufactured between July 1, 1979 and July 1, 1998 that do not contain PCBs 

must be labeled "No PCBs" 
 If an FLB is not labeled "No PCBs," it is best to assume it contains PCBs unless it is 

known to be manufactured after 1979 
 FLBs manufactured after 1998 are not required to be labeled 

When you must remove a PCB suspect ballasts from a fixture, you must wear appropriate 
protective equipment. Nitrile gloves, eye protection and chemical resistant coveralls may be 
necessary if contact with internal components is required. When working around sharp objects 
like sheet metal, wear appropriate outer work gloves in addition to inner Nitrile gloves. Eye 
protection is especially important when working on systems, which are in operation. Personnel 
must never attempt to open a ballast. Any leaking PCB suspect ballast should be placed in a 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

plastic bag or some other appropriate container to prevent contamination caused by the leaking 
fluids. 

1. Place the ballast into the 5-gallon open-head drum supplied by Laboratory Services. Keep 
the lid on the drum except when you are adding or removing material. 

2. Laboratory Services will provide appropriate PCB Markings on the container. 
Maintenance personnel must mark the drum "Removed from service on (date)" and mark 
the day when disposal was requested. 

3. Contact Laboratory Services (915) 5433 to have your container(s) removed after you 
have marked, filled, and labeled a drum with the date the materials were removed from 
service. 

 

 


