
The University of Mississippi 

Course Load Requirements for Graduate Student Employees 

Summary/Purpose:  The University requires students receiving assistantship, instructorship, or 
fellowship stipends to enroll each semester for a prescribed number of hours. A schedule that 
must be observed is given for students who are on specified time service appointments 

The policy of the University shall be to require students receiving assistantship, instructorship, or 
fellowship stipends to enroll each semester for a prescribed number of hours.  

During the academic year, the following schedule must be observed:  

Students on three-fourths time service appointments must enroll for 9 hours, but may not enroll 
for more than that number*; only 6 hours of which can be in course work, the balance being 
made up of enrollment in thesis, dissertation, or recital hours.  

Students on one-half time service appointments must enroll for at least 9 hours, but may not 
enroll for more than 12 hours; only 9 hours of which can be in course work, the balance being 
made up of enrollment in thesis, dissertation, or recital hours.  

* Only under special circumstances may a student be employed on a service assignment on a 
basis of more than one-half time. Students employed as research assistants on assignments 
which meet degree program requirements may be employed up to 30 hours per week, or on a 
three-fourths time basis during the academic year and on a full-time basis during the summer.  

Students on one-fourth time service appointments must enroll for at least 6 hours, and may not  
enroll for more than 12 hours.  

Students on service appointments of less than one-fourth time must enroll for at least 3 hours.  

Students receiving a full University non-service fellowship must enroll for at least 9 hours. They  
also may be employed up to a maximum of one-fourth time on service appointments. If so, they  
may not enroll for more than 12 hours.  

Students receiving a University non-service fellowship must enroll for at least 3 hours per term 
in which the fellowship is held.  

It is the responsibility of department chairpersons, directors of research bureaus, and other 
signatory officers having graduate students in their employ to see to it that the above policy is 
observed.  

 

Page 1 of 1 


