
The University of Mississippi 
 

IT Media  

Summary/Purpose: The purpose of IT Media is to provide UM faculty and staff 
with convenient access to current and well-functioning multimedia equipment for use 
in their professional endeavors.  

RESERVATIONS  

All reservations should be made through the IT Media Web site (www.olemiss.edu/itmedia) 
and should be submitted at least two (2) business days in advance of the date/time the 
equipment is needed.  IT Media will make every effort to satisfy requests that are made 
without adequate advance notice but cannot guarantee that such requests will be met.  

If reserved equipment is no longer needed, an e-mail must be sent to itmedia@olemiss.edu prior 
to the delivery/pick-up date so the equipment can be returned to the checkout pool.  A fee will be 
assessed to any person who fails to cancel a request. 
 
DELIVERY AND PICK-UP 

Deliveries, pick-ups, and returns will be handled weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. 
and 5:00 p.m.  If equipment is needed prior to or at 8:00 a.m., the requester should plan to 
pick it up or have it delivered the previous day.  

Once a reservation has been placed online, individuals who choose to pick up the 
equipment themselves, rather than have it delivered, will need to call IT Media at 662-915-
7908 to arrange a pick-up time.  All equipment that is picked up must be returned by the 
customer to the pick up location.  

There will be no deliveries to buildings that are off-campus or to buildings that are not 
handicapped accessible.  Individuals in these locations may reserve IT Media equipment and 
transport it themselves. 
 
During times when the university is officially closed, such as holidays or closures due to 
inclement weather, equipment deliveries will not take place.  
 
USAGE AND FEES 
Equipment may be kept for three (3) days at no charge.   

A fee will be assessed for equipment that is needed for more than three (3) days of use.  After 
the first three days, there will be a $20 per day fee.  

If the end of the three (3) day maximum check-out period occurs on a weekend or holiday, 
then the return deadline will be extended to the morning of the next working day. 

For-profit projects (conferences and camps) and externally funded units may also make use of IT 
Media services.  However, such groups will be charged usage fees for each day that the 
equipment is needed. 

No more than 3 items of the same type may be checked out at a single time.  For example, a 
single request for 4 laptops or 4 LCD projectors would be denied. 
 
There will be a late fee assessed if equipment is not returned on time.  This late fee only 
applies to equipment picked up and returned by the user; it does not apply to equipment 

http://www.olemiss.edu/itmedia


that is delivered and picked up by IT Media.  

Any damage done to equipment while in the possession of the requesting unit will be 
the financial responsibility of that unit.  


