
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Ethidium Bromide Disposal 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Ethidium Bromide Disposal Policy details the minimum requirements 
and procedures to properly dispose of Ethidium Bromide Solutions and Gels. 

 

Ethidium Bromide (EtBr) is a strong mutagen and a possible carcinogen or teratogen. 

 When you work with EtBr, you must wear a lab coat, chemical splash goggles, and nitrile 
gloves.  

 Always use caution when using an ultraviolet light while working with EtBr.  
 Always use a chemical fume hood during processes that can generate EtBr dusts or mists.  

 

Ethidium Bromide, unused 

Collect for disposal by Laboratory Services 

 Aqueous solutions containing < 5 mg/L EtBr 
o Dispose directly to the sanitary sewer. 

 Aqueous solutions containing > 5 mg/L EtBr - If the solutions contain no other 
Hazardous Materials (organics, salts, metals, etc.) 

o For every 100 ml of EtBr solution add 
o 20 ml 5% hypo phosphorous acid solution and 
o 12 ml 0.5 M sodium nitrite solution. 
o Stir mixture and let sit for 20 hours 
o Neutralize with sodium bicarbonate 
o Dispose in the sanitary sewer (sink). 

 Solvents containing EtBr 
o Collect for disposal by Laboratory Services. 

 Radioactive EtBr solutions 
o Collect for disposal by Radiation Safety / Laboratory Services  

 Gels containing EtBr 
o Break up Gels 
o Chemically degrade as noted above 
o Dispose to the sanitary sewer, or, 
o Dry Gels and Collect for disposal by Laboratory Services 

 Materials (gloves, pipettes, tips, etc.) used with EtBr 
o Place in secure container (taped box with plastic bag liner) and place the container 

directly into a dumpster. 
 Commercially available products, like the "Destaining Bags" produced by AMRESCO 

provide an alternative method of treatment for solutions. 

o The Destaining bags are simple and inexpensive. 
 Drop a Destaining bag into your solution, 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

 Periodically swirl it around a few times,  
 Let it stand overnight. 
 In the morning, remove the bag and collect for disposal by Laboratory 

Services. 
 Perform UV check of the solution. If it no longer fluoresces, pour the 

solution down the drain - provided no other hazardous chemicals are 
present. 

 Whenever possible, use a less hazardous chemical for the identification of DNA. 
o Sigma-Aldrich produces a product called REDTAQ DNA Polymerase. It is an 

inert red tracer conjugated to a polymerase. 
 Other EtBr disposal procedures should be avoided. 

o The practice of oxidizing ethidium bromide with household bleach is inefficient 
and may produce additional hazardous compounds.  


