
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  State Of Mississippi Aid Programs 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for awarding and disbursing State of 

Mississippi aid programs. 

 

Disclaimer:    This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

Policy Content: 

 

 16.0 Overview 

 16.1 Awarding  

 16.2 Disbursement 

 16.3 Late fees 

 

Definitions and terms: 

 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 MOSFA – Mississippi Office of Student Financial Aid 

 MTAG – Mississippi Tuition Assistance Grant 

 MESG – Mississippi Eminent Scholars Grant 

 HELP – Higher Education Legislative Plan 

 LAW – Mississippi Law Enforcement Officers & Firemen Scholarship 

 NISS – Nissan Scholarship 

 SUMD – Summer Developmental Program Grant 

 TES – Teach Education Scholars Forgivable Loan 

 SLPL – Speech-Language Pathologist Forgivable Loan 

 GTS/CSA – Graduate Teach, Counselor, School Administrator Forgivable Loan 

     

 

 

 

 



Part 16.0 Overview 

 
State of Mississippi aid programs such as the MTAG, MESG, HELP, GEARUP, LAW, 
NISS, TES, SLPL, GTS/CSA, and the William Winter Teacher's Program are 
administrated by MOSFA in Jackson. A complete listing of State Aid can be found at: 
https://www.msfinancialaid.org/.  To be considered for these awards, each year the 
student must complete the MOSFA's application available online at: 
https://www.msfinancialaid.org/. 
 

 

Part 16.1 Awarding  

 
Eligibility for all State of Mississippi Aid programs is determined by the MOSFA.  

OFA will package estimated awards on students’ financial aid award letters to all 

students who appear to qualify for MTAG and MESG.  In addition, as OFA receives 

awarding rosters from MOSFA, other estimated state aid awards will be added such as 

William Winter and HELP.  

As of Fall 2017, all undergraduate students will receive State aid through only one State 

grant program that awards the larger amount.  For example, students who are eligible for 

both MESG and MTAG will receive MESG only (since the MESG award is the larger 

award).  

 

Part 16.2 Disbursement 

Disbursements of state aid will occur at the time funds are received.  OFA must submit 

an enrollment roster to MOSFA after the 10
th

 day of the semester.  Once MOSFA 

receives enrollment rosters from all schools, funds will be disbursed.  State aid funds are 

typically received at the end of September for the fall semester and at the end of February 

for the spring semester.  Students must be enrolled in 15 hours each semester in order for 

the State aid to disburse.  No state aid is available for summer or intersession terms.  

MTAG/MESG, as well as other state aid programs, may be prorated subject to funds 
availability or other awards that are received. Funds are disbursed upon receipt. 
 
As of Fall 2018, the University will disburse approved HELP grants at the beginning of 
the semester (before the State sends the actual funds).  
 
Upon the creation of MTAG, the Legislature of Mississippi stipulated that the Federal 
Pell Grant plus MTAG may not exceed the maximum value of the Federal Pell Grant. 
Therefore, a student may not be awarded the Federal Pell Grant and MTAG in excess of 
the maximum value of the Federal Pell Grant. To comply with this law, reductions are 
made to MTAG. 
 

https://www.msfinancialaid.org/
http://riseupms.com/state-aid/


Part 16.3 Late Fees 

 
The Office of the Bursar will remove any late fees assessed to students’ accounts when 
state aid funds are received later in the semester.  


