
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Fire Alarms 
 

Summary/Purpose:  This policy defines the expectations for students when fire alarms sound in 
residence halls. The policy gives suggestions for avoiding accidentally setting off alarms, and 
also describes the sanctions involved for anyone who intentionally sets off an alarm.    
  
Fire alarms have been installed throughout the residence halls for student safety. In the event that 
a fire alarm should sound, students must leave the building immediately through the nearest exit. 
Become familiar with the evacuation diagram located on each hallway.  Residents are instructed 
to remain outside of the building until the Fire Department gives the order that the building is 
safe and residents may return to their rooms. Residents who remain in the residence halls after an 
alarm has sounded are subject to arrest and University judicial action. Intentionally causing a 
false fire alarm is considered a serious infraction and will be dealt with accordingly. The Fire 
Department responds to all fire alarms regardless of their origin and the cost is charged to the 
Housing Department.   
Please be aware that smoking, cooking and aerosols sprayed near smoke detectors or sprinklers 
may result in an accidental false fire alarm. An intentional false fire alarm may result in arrest, 
University disciplinary action, and loss of housing. A $500 fine will be assessed to anyone 
responsible for setting off a fire alarm.   If no one person or persons are found responsible, the 
cost will be assessed to the entire floor or building as common area damage.  
Each semester, one planned fire drill will be scheduled. This will provide an opportunity for 
residents to practice evacuating the building. All alarms that sound should be treated as a 
potentially life-threatening situation.  
WHEN A FIRE ALARM SOUNDS:  

 1. Leave your room immediately, as required by state law.   
 2. Leave the wall or overhead light on.   
 3. Close the room door and lock it.   
 4. Walk quietly and quickly to the nearest exit. Do not use the elevators.   
 5. Once outside, go to the designated waiting area.  
 6. Remain outside until the signal is given by building staff to return to your room.  

 
For your own protection obey all fire regulations. Failure to evacuate a hall when an alarm 
sounds represents grounds for disciplinary action. Residence Life staff and the University Police 
reserve the right to enter student rooms to locate the source of the problem and to ensure that 
everyone has evacuated the building.  
  
 
 


