
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 

Extra Pay for Extra Work 

Summary/Purpose: Regulations are given as to when exempt, nonexempt and faculty may earn 
extra pay. This includes full-time faculty teaching through the Office of Outreach & Continuing 
Education, directing a correspondence course or teaching during summer school. Guidance is also 
provided for full time staff teaching.  Regulations are also given for employees entering into 
consultation or services on and off-campus. 

 
Nonexempt University employees as defined by the 1966 Amendments to the Fair Labor Standards 
Act, will be compensated for hours worked in excess of the basic workweek when they are required 
for emergency reasons to work overtime (see "Fair Labor Standards Act" for complete details). 
When personnel are required to work overtime, prior approval of the department head must be 
obtained. 

 
No additional payments for extra work will be made to department heads of the University or top-
level administrative employees when the work performed is in connection with their regular duties. 

 
If a staff member is approved to teach a class, it is expected the employee will fulfill their assigned 
duties and accurately report time and attendance.  To ensure compliance, the following options are 
available. 
 

• With approval of their supervisor, a staff employee may adjust their work schedule to make 
up missed hours within the same workweek.  All full-time employees are required to work 
a minimum of 40 hours during the standard workweek.   

 
• If the schedule isn’t adjusted to make up for the missed work time, the employee may use 

personal leave if a sufficient balance is available.  
 

• If hours are not made up and accrued personal leave is unavailable, 
- AND the employee is exempt/salaried, the department must process a Form 3 to reduce 

the employee’s compensation for missed hours. 
- AND the employee is non-exempt/hourly, they will not get paid for a full 40 hours 

during that particular work week.   Hourly employees should record time exactly as 
worked within their home department on the time sheet. 

 
Should an audit be conducted, it will be the department’s responsibility to account for time logged 
as hours worked or accrued leave taken.  These records should remain within the departmental 
files. 

 
A full-time faculty member may teach and receive compensation for one (1) credit-bearing course 
each semester taught through the Office of Outreach & Continuing Education. Tenured and tenure 
track faculty members who are not employed on a twelve-month contract are allowed to earn 
compensation in addition to academic year salary for work performed between the end of the spring 
semester and the beginning of the fall semester (note: this period begins the Monday after spring 
commencement and ends on the last weekend before the first day of the Nine-month faculty 
contract). 

 
Faculty can earn pay by teaching, conducting research, or working on sponsored activities. The 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 

maximum number of classes that a regular faculty member may teach during the summer is four 
(4) three-hour courses (or equivalent). Deans of the schools or College may impose a more 
restrictive limit. The following types of courses offered during this time will count towards this 
maximum allowed number: 

 
• May Intersession courses (all campuses) 
• August Intersession courses (all campuses) 
• Oxford Summer courses (includes Full Summer Term, First Summer Term, and 

Second Summer Term) 
 

Nine-month faculty teaching less than full-time during the summer may be paid for research or sponsored 
activities at their academic year rate for the portion of their time they are not teaching. For example, an 
individual teaching half-time during a particular summer term would be allowed to earn up to an 
additional 50 percent pay during that period, calculated at his/her academic year salary rate on a daily 
basis. 
 
A full-time teaching load during any of the above terms is defined in the following ways: 

 
• For one of the intersessions: One (1) three-hour course; for the first or second summer term. 

 
• Two (2) three-hour courses, with the possible addition of a one (1) one-hour related lab 

courses, taught over the first and second summer terms are counted in part and evenly 
for each term. 

 
• Courses that are less than three-hours make a partial contribution to the full-time teaching 

load. 
 
This policy has no effect on salary per class amounts paid from the Summer Session budget. 

 
A full-time University faculty member may receive, as extra compensation, fees for directing a 
limited number of correspondence courses. 

 
In general, when the University enters into contract or arrangement to provide services to an 
organization outside of the University, the participating personnel of the University will not be 
entitled to extra salaries for these services. The employees will receive their regular salaries, and 
the organization will reimburse the University. 

 
Exceptions may be made when additional responsibilities and work load can be demonstrated. This 
statement does not preclude fees offered for consulting and the rendering of professional services 
on an individual basis when such activities meet with the approval of the Chancellor. The terms of 
any such arrangement with an outside organization, either for regular services or for individual 
consultative services and the like, must have the prior approval of the dean and the Chancellor. 
See also "Non-Institutional Employment Policies." 


