
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Employment of Students 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Students who have some type of employment with The University of 
Mississippi, must complete all required Student Employment paperwork.  An explanation of how 
a student is defined, limitation of hours, and rate of pay is given. 

Students who have some type of employment with The University of Mississippi, should 
complete all required Student Employment paperwork. Students are selected on the basis of 
qualifications for the job. The University expects the applicant to be able and willing to work and 
to have an acceptable academic record. A number of positions for graduate assistants, laboratory 
assistants, counselors, etc., are assigned to advanced students on the basis of ability and 
academic achievement.  

A student employee is defined as a person who is enrolled as a student in the University and who 
is employed part time by the University. A person employed during the summer months who 
intends to enter college in the fall will be considered a student employee. The University policy 
of "Employment of Relatives" applies to the employment of students. The following policies also 
apply to student employment:  

1.   The following limitations on hours of work for student employees have been adopted:  

      a. Maximum amount of hours eligible to work per week   

 Maximum Amount 
of Hours 

All US Citizens or Permanent Resident   25 hours per week 
International Student Employees on F-1 or J-1 Student Visa 20 hours per week 

b. Graduate Student Stipends (Assistantships/Instructorships/Fellowships):  See the HR                   
policy entitled "GRADUATE STUDENT EMPLOYEES COURSE LOAD" for more 
detailed information regarding work hours and course load requirements. 

2.   The rate of pay for student positions is established jointly by the Department Head and the 
Director of Human Resources. The minimum wage rate for students must be at least 
$7.25/hour. 

3. As soon as the department knows that a student will be working, the appropriate Human 
Resources form should be processed.  

a. Regular, Hourly Employees - At the time a student is employed, an Electronic Form 18 
will be completed by the department and submitted through the E-forms system. The 
student is required to come to the Department of Human Resources (Jackson Ave Center-
Central) and complete required forms. Student employees cannot be paid by the 
University until they have completed the employment new hire packet and present 
employment eligibility documentation.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

b. Work Study Students (paid by the hour):  Students on the College Work Study 
Program must be approved to work by the Financial Aid Office. The Financial Aid Office 
is responsible for initiating the Electronic Form 18 and ensuring the employment new 
hire packet is completed.  

A student paid on an hourly basis is required to keep accurate record of the number of 
hours worked each week on the Departmental Time Record for Student Employment 
(HR12).  This Time Record should be signed by the student and the department head 
before the hours are submitted. The Time Record should be filed in the departmental 
records file for seven years and is subject to audit.  

Change of Status for hourly employees should be made on an Electronic Form 18. 

c. Undergraduate Assistants, Graduate Assistants, and Graduate Research Assistants:   
The job titles include students employed in a non-teaching capacity. The student may be 
employed for a semester, a summer session, or an intersession and may work a specified 
number of hours each week not to exceed the number of hours approved by the Director 
of Human Resources.  At the time a student is employed, an Electronic Form 7 will be 
completed by the department and submitted through the E-forms system. 
 

d. Graduate Instructors are students who will teach a course and who will report grades in 
their own name.  Students in this category are usually employed for one or two semesters, 
summer sessions, or intersessions. At the time a student is employed, an Electronic Form 
7 will be completed by the department and submitted through the E-forms system. 

All changes in compensation, title, cost center number, and resignations for students 
processed on an Electronic Form 7 should be reported on an Electronic Form 3.  

4.  Address changes, name changes, and tax changes should be processed through the 
Department of Human Resources.    

5. It is essential that departments process an Electronic Form indicating the last day of service 
when a student is no longer working. If the assignment is canceled and the student never 
works in the position, the appropriate form (Form 18/hourly or Form 7/stipend) should be 
processed with the comment “No Service” to cancel the hiring form.   

6. Preference will be given to college students; however, exceptions can be made if a qualified 
college student cannot be located. If a high school student is employed, he/she must be at 
least 16 years old. 


