
The University of Mississippi 
 

Classroom Technology 
 
Summary/Purpose: This document describes the Classroom Technology Policy for 
classrooms equipped through the Classroom Technology Fund (CTF).  While it is 
desirable to place equipment within the individual departments, there are a variety of 
subsequent concerns that must be addressed.  These concerns are maintenance, security, 
access, scheduling, enhancements, and support.  

 
MAINTENANCE  
Maintenance is described as the ongoing upkeep of all equipment that has been 
purchased and installed using CTF within a department.  

The group within the university that will handle supported maintenance on equipment is 
the Office of Information Technology (IT), specifically the Academic Computing (AC) 
unit of IT.  AC will be responsible for maintenance on all equipment installed as part of 
the classroom technology project.  Each department receiving equipment must provide 
AC with a key (or electronic access where applicable) to the designated classroom so that 
routine maintenance can be performed.  A representative of AC will also serve as the 
primary liaison between the university and the equipment vendors for any warranty 
replacement needs.  

Each department receiving equipment must designate a departmental representative both 
to facilitate any maintenance requests and to function as the liaison between the 
department and AC.  

CTF-sponsored maintenance of equipment does not include the replacement of any lost 
or stolen items; this is the responsibility of the individual departments.  

The Office of the Provost, as the wards of the CTF, will work towards setting 
aside a portion of the fund to be used for maintenance of installed equipment.  

SECURITY  
Security refers to the ongoing safety and security of all installed equipment which has 
been purchased through the CTF.  

A base level of security will be included with all CTF equipment—this includes locks on 
all portable carts and lecterns.  A key to the lecterns may be obtained from AC.   
However, as a recipient of equipment via the CTF, the receiving department has primary 
responsibility for the physical security of the equipment and the replacement of any lost 
or stolen items.  Accordingly, any equipment funded by the CTF will be placed on the 
inventory of the receiving department.  



ACCESS  
Access to equipment installed by IT should be based on direct need.  The goal of 
installing technology in the classroom is more than just the actual placement of 
equipment, but also making it available to professors and instructors who will make 
ready use of the equipment in their instruction of students.  

Any department receiving equipment via the CTF will have primary access to the 
facilities during standard teaching hours.  The host department should make available the 
facilities to meet other university teaching needs during times when it is not using these 
facilities to meet its own teaching needs.  CTF allocations are made with the 
understanding that the receiving department will seek to maximize intradepartmental and 
interdepartmental use of the technology and will promote efficient and fair use.  Evidence 
to the contrary, e.g., lack of use, will affect future replacements, upgrades, and potential 
new allocations to the department.  

SCHEDULING  
Scheduling refers to how access to equipment funded by the CTF will be facilitated.  

IT will maintain a Web site (see www.olemiss.edu/umct/) listing the locations of all CTF 
classrooms, the available equipment, and number of seats to assist the central 
administration scheduling agent.  Departments and the central administration scheduling 
agent should make every effort to maximize use of CTF facilities when making 
scheduling decisions.  

TRAINING  
Training refers to the ongoing training of faculty and instructors on installed equipment 
within departments which have CTF classrooms.  

In order to best prepare faculty to use the equipment installed in classrooms by the CTF, 
a two-tier training structure will be implemented.  

First tier: Local Departmental Experts  
Each department receiving equipment should designate a “local expert” who 
will be available to answer immediate questions about how the equipment is 
used.  (This information will also be posted near the installed equipment and 
made available online.)  

Second tier: The Office of Information Technology  
IT will be responsible for scheduling multiple training opportunities for each 
type of equipment installation option funded by the CTF.  These training 
seminars will be provided at the beginning of each semester and at several 
other times throughout the semester.  

ENHANCEMENTS 
 “Enhancements” refers to the ongoing technology upgrades and enhancement requests 
in CTF and non-CTF classrooms.  

There are three primary alternatives for requesting classroom technology enhancements:  



 
Annual CTF Request 
Annually, the Office of the Provost will contact academic administrators about 
CTF opportunities along with instructions for submitting requests 
electronically.  Working with the Office of the Provost, the Instructional 
Technology Standing Committee reviews each CTF request against the available 
CTF budget and makes recommendations. 
 
 Other CTF Request 
When departments have immediate needs for classroom technology enhancements 
and would like CTF support, the academic administrator will contact the Office of 
the Provost.  IT may be engaged to assist with the budget and schedule timelines 
amid other technology initiatives. 
 
Non-CTF Request 
When departments have needs for technology enhancements with funding 
support, the department may contact IT, if assistance is required beyond the local 
department experts. 
 

For each alternative, Facilities Planning may be initially engaged when changes to the 
facilities are required.  Some examples include renovating buildings, replacing furniture, 
and remodeling classrooms. 
 
IT will make every effort to accommodate approved requests for classroom technology 
enhancements in a timely manner.  In the majority of requests, classroom technology 
initiatives require the assistance of Facilities Management for electrical wiring; IT 
Telecommunications for network and cable wiring; and external vendors for the 
technology installation as well as procurement restrictions that extend a project.  While 
IT will assist each department with setting the appropriate turnaround time expectations 
amid other technology projects, departments are encouraged to provide IT with advance 
notice, so discussions about realistic timelines can begin early in project. 
 


