
The University of Mississippi 
 
 

Residence Hall/Apartment Bill of Rights 
 
Summary/Purpose: This policy defines the basic expectations students should have 
for each other when living together in a residence hall environment. 

 
In a group living environment, it is important that each student understand his or her 

rights as a student and his or her responsibilities to others. The rights to study and sleep 
are considered primary in a group living environment. For most students, the main 
purpose for enrollment is to pursue an education. Excessive noise inhibits this goal. 
Therefore, any activity that a student chooses to do in a residence hall must not infringe 
upon another’s right to sleep and study. 

 
The University has some basic expectations that govern the special nature of 
interpersonal relationships within the community. These are reasonable expectations 
that students should have for one another while sharing space in an apartment. The 
Residence Hall/Apartment Bill of Rights outlines these expectations. 

 
RESIDENCE HALL/APARTMENT BILL OF RIGHTS 

• The right to sleep during the night undisturbed 
• The right to study in one’s room free of noise and distractions during quiet 

hours 
• The right of access to one’s room and facilities 
• The right to a clean room and clean common areas 
• The right to have one’s belongings respected 
• The right to have guests in the room with the understanding that they will 

not disturb the roommate’s right to sleep or study 
• The right to privacy 
• The right to redress grievances 
• The right to feel secure against physical harm or emotional distress that is 

so severe or pervasive that it unreasonably interferes with one’s access to 
the University’s resources and opportunities 

 
These rights apply to all students living in on-campus housing. Violating the rights of 
other students will result in disciplinary actions and/or reassignment to another location. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 1 of 1 


