
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 30 

Biological Safety Manual 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Biological Safety Manual details the minimum requirements and 
procedures for operations involving Biohazardous Materials.  
 

Introduction  

Institutional Biosafety Committee  

Roles and Responsibilities  

Biological Laboratory Safety  

Disposal of Biological Material  

Shipment of Biological Agents  

Recombinant DNA  

Regulations for Working with Biohazardous Organisms  

Regulations for Working with Human Blood, Fluids or Tissue  

Regulations for Working with Animals  

Responsibilities of the Principal Investigator  

Facility Design  

Biosafety Level 1  

Biosafety Level 2  

Biosafety Level 3  

Animal Biosafety Level 1  

Animal Biosafety Level 2  

Animal Biosafety Level 3  

Animal Biosafety Level 4  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 30 

Introduction 

The purpose of this manual is to set biological safety policies for the University of Mississippi, 
Oxford Campus. This manual contains information, regulations and procedures to provide for the 
safety of personnel and the environment from biologically hazardous materials. It is not intended 
that this manual be an exhaustive treatment of biological safety and certain work areas will have 
problems not covered herein. In general, federal and state guidelines dealing with biological 
safety are not restated herein, but all such guidelines are assumed to be applicable and binding on 
all personnel working at the Oxford campus of the University. 

Information on biological safety is available from the Laboratory Services (LS) for the 
development of specific safety programs for operations not covered in this manual. Additional 
information on topics in this manual as well as slide and videocassette seminars are also 
available from the LS. 

DEFINITION OF A BIOHAZARD 

Biohazardous agent is one that is biological in nature, capable of self-replication and has the 
capacity to produce deleterious effects upon other biological organisms, particularly humans. 

DANGEROUS CHARACTERISTIC 

It is important to distinguish a dangerous characteristic of hazardous biological agents. They all 
have the ability to replicate. In contrast to chemical agents, infectious biological agents can 
reproduce which gives rise to the potential of large populations in nature when small numbers 
are released from a controlled situation. Although SAFE doses of chemical and physical agents 
are often specified, there is NO SAFE level of a non- contained pathogenic organism. 

TRAINING IN BIOHAZARDS 

Containment and safe handling of known and potentially biohazardous materials require strict 
adherence to prudent microbiological practices. Therefore, all personnel directly or indirectly 
involved with any such materials must receive adequate instruction in these practices. This 
should include training in appropriate aseptic technique and instruction in the biology of the 
organism so that the potential biohazards can be understood and appreciated. 

Safety in your work involving biohazards depends upon how you or a member of a team applies 
available guidelines. In addition to specific safety knowledge, motivation and critical judgement 
are absolutely essential for ensuring the protection of all personnel, the public and the 
environment. 

ROUTES OF EXPOSURE 

Exposure and subsequent infection of an individual with a biohazardous agent can occur by 
several routes. The most common routes are the following: 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 30 

1. Oral 
2. Respiratory 
3. Skin puncture 
4. Penetration through unbroken skin 
5. Conjunctival 

 
All the above routes account for a percentage of known infections, but respiratory exposure 
probably accounts for 65 to 75% of all infections. 

Most routine bacteriological and virological procedures are capable of producing aerosols. In 
order to initiate a respiratory infection, aerosols must be deposited and retained in the respiratory 
tract. Particles of less than 5 micrometers are most effective in establishing airborne infections in 
laboratory animals. Airborne organisms can remain suspended in air for long periods of time and 
can be carried around the room by convective air currents and also throughout the ventilation 
systems of buildings. Since these organisms remain infectious for long periods of time, there is a 
potential danger to anyone who comes in contact with the organisms. In most cases, however, the 
doses to which an individual may be exposed are insufficient to cause disease. Infectious doses 
for humans vary with the agent, the route of exposure and the resistance of the host. 

Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC) 

The institution shall establish an IBC whose responsibilities need not be restricted to 
recombinant DNA and shall meet the requirements as outlined in Section IV-B-2 of the NIH 
Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules. 

A.  The Institutional Biosafety Committee or IBC means a committee that meets the 
requirements for membership specified by the NIH and reviews, approves, and oversees projects 
in accordance with the responsibilities defined by the NIH. The IBC shall be established by the 
institution and represent a collective expertise and experience in recombinant DNA research 
experiments and potential risk to public health or the environment. 

B. On behalf of the institution, the IBC is responsible for reviewing for compliance with the NIH 
guidelines for research with pathogens and recombinant DNA research. This review shall include 
an independent assessment of the containment levels required by these Guidelines for the 
proposed research, an assessment of the facilities, procedures, and practices, and of the training 
and expertise of personnel. The IBC will notify the PI and LS of the results of its review. The 
IBC will also be responsible for setting containment levels as specified by NIH guidelines and 
direct LS to periodically review laboratory conditions where recombinant DNA or other 
biohazardous research is being conducted to ensure that the requirements of the Guidelines are 
being fulfilled. 

C.  The IBC will report to the LS institutional official and to the Office of Recombinant DNA 
Activities at the NIH any significant problems with or violations of the Guidelines and any 
significant research-related accidents or illness unless the IBC determines that the PI has already 
done so. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 30 

D.  The IBC may not authorize initiation of experiments not explicitly covered by the Guidelines 
until NIH (with the advice of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (NIH) when required) 
establishes the containment requirement. 

E. Performing such other functions as may be delegated to the IBC under personnel descriptions. 

Roles and Responsibilities 

Safety in activities involving biohazardous agents depends on the individual conducting them. 
The Guidelines cannot anticipate every possible situation. Motivation and good judgement are 
the key essentials to protection of health and the environment. These guidelines are intended to 
help the institution, Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), Laboratory Services (LS) and 
Principal Investigator (PI) determine the safeguards that should be implemented. These 
guidelines will never be complete or final in that all conceivable experiments involving 
recombinant DNA and other biohazardous agents cannot be foreseen, therefore it is the 
responsibility of the institution and those associated with it to adhere to the intent of the 
guidelines as well as to their specifics. 

Each institution (and the IBC acting on its behalf) is responsible for ensuring that recombinant 
DNA activities comply with the guidelines. General recognition of institutional authority and 
responsibility properly establishes accountability for safe conduct of the research at the local 
level. 

Biological Laboratory Safety 

It has been shown that the most common exposure route for pathogenic or disease inducing 
agents is through the production of aerosols. Any operation that mechanically disturbs a solution 
has the potential to release a cloud of contaminated droplets into the air. Many of these droplets 
will be too small to be seen and capable of being transported from the point of origin by air 
currents. The aerosols may also settle on equipment or hands and be transmitted by subsequent 
contact. Good technique, therefore, is to minimize production of aerosols. Work with pathogenic 
or disease inducing agents must be done in containment hoods such as biological hoods at a 
minimum of BL2 procedures (actual biological safety level is determined by the organism or 
pathogen). 

Basic safety rules for aerosols are as follows: 

1. Do not expel the last drop from a pipette. The expulsion creates droplets. 
2. Do not mix solutions by pipette. 
3. Sterilization of loops or needles by flame causes spattering. The instruments should be cleaned 
in a decontaminating solution before heating. A shield to catch flying particles should be used. 
4. Allow needles and loops to cool before applying them to specimens or cultures. 
5. Do not rely on the medium to cool the instruments. 
6. Do not streak agar that has a rough or broken surface. 
7. Agitate broth cultures only by swirling smoothly in a horizontal plane, not in a vertical 
fashion. 
8. Surround the needle with a disinfectant-soaked cloth while injecting biologically active 
materials. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 30 

9. Wrap the syringe with a disinfectant-soaked cloth when breaking the needle off after use, prior 
to disposal. 
10. Blenders and centrifuges create large quantities of aerosols.  

Allow the aerosols to settle for several minutes before opening these devices. 

All of the techniques above can only reduce the generation of aerosols, not eliminate them. 
Where the possibility of infection is significant, the work must be done in a biological safety 
cabinet or, if the risk is very high or the disease is a serious one, the work must be performed in a 
glove box. The specifications of these cabinets are given in the section "Biological Safety 
Cabinets." 

In addition to the aerosol control practices covered in the previous section, there are a number of 
other procedures that must be followed in microbiological or biomedical laboratories. The items 
listed below are minimum standards that must be followed in every active laboratory. Where the 
risk is high the investigator will be asked to make a formal presentation of additional safety 
precautions to the Institutional Biosafety Committee for approval. 

1. Laboratory doors should be kept closed when experiments are in progress. 
2. Work surfaces are to be decontaminated at least once a day and after each spill or viable 
material. 
3. All contaminated liquid or solid wastes are decontaminated before disposal. 
4. Mechanical pipetting devices must be used; mouth pipetting is prohibited. 
5. Eating drinking, smoking, storing food, and applying cosmetics are not to be permitted in the 
work area. 
6. Persons must wash their hands when they leave the laboratory. 
7. All laboratory operations must conform to the requirements of the Biosafety Level assigned by 
the Institutional Biosafety Committee, see Appendix C 
8. All animal operations must conform to the requirements of the Animal Biosafety Level 
assigned by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, see Appendix D. 

Disposal of Biological Material 

In general, it is the responsibility of the principal investigator or supervisor of a laboratory 
handling biologically hazardous material to insure its PROPER STERILIZATION prior to 
disposal either as a chemical hazard, a radiological hazard or as ordinary trash. NO 
BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL STORED IN A BIOHAZARDOUS BAG WILL BE 
DISPOSED OF IN THE ORDINARY UNIVERSITY TRASH. The biohazardous material 
must be rendered inactive by sterilization either by the principal. If sterilized by the principal 
investigator, the material must be removed from the Biohazard Bag prior to disposal in ordinary 
University trash by the principal investigator. 

Autoclaving and dry heat sterilization will be the responsibility of the principal investigator or 
laboratory supervisor. 

DISPOSAL OF MEDICAL WASTE 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 6 of 30 

Laboratory Services (LS) is responsible for compliance with and enforcement of the federal and 
state laws and regulations that apply to the use and disposal of biologically hazardous materials. 
Specific regulations and policies are located in the Biological Safety Manual 
 

Federal regulations currently divide biological waste into two categories - Medical Waste and 
Pathological Waste The simplified definition is that biological waste produced in research and 
in the testing of materials is Medical and biological waste produced in classrooms or in 
educational settings are Pathological. 

Medical Waste = Research / Testing - - - - - - Pathological Waste = Classroom / Education  
 

Medical Waste disposal requires the services of an outside contractor and the segregation of 
waste materials at the departmental level.  

Follow the packaging guidelines from the vendor – published on the LS Web site 

DRY HEAT STERILIZATION 

For the sterilization of sharps, syringes, broken glass, etc. which are contaminated with a 
biohazard, it is recommended that dry heat be used, e.g., a laboratory drying oven that is capable 
of temperatures up to 200 ° C. Laboratory Services does not have the facilities for this type of 
sterilization. As a result, it is the responsibility of the individual investigator or his or her 
department to provide this type of sterilization, if it is needed. 

A. The following table gives the recommended temperature and time for various biohazards: 

DRY HEAT TEMPERATURE/TIME CYCLE 

- - - BIO-HAZARD - - - - - - - - - TEMPERATURE - - - - -TIME 

- - - Non-sporing organisms - - - 100 ° C- - - - - - - 1 hr. 
- - - Fungal spores  - - - - - - - - - 120 ° C- - - - - - - 1 hr. 
- - - Bacterial spores - - - - - - - - 160 ° C- - - - - - - 1 hr. 
- - - Resistant spores - - - - - - - - 180 ° C- - - - - - - 1 hr. 
- - - Resistant viruses  - - - - - - - 200 ° C- - - - - - - 1 hr. 

 

STEAM AUTOCLAVES 

The recommended method for sterilization of non-burnable biohazardous material is steam 
autoclaving. Since treatment conditions to achieve sterility will vary in relation to the volume of 
materials treated, its contamination level, the moisture content, and other factors care should be 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 7 of 30 

exercised in using this method of sterilization. In general, it is recommended that the autoclave 
by operated at a temperature of 121° C and run for a minimum of one hour. 

However, the recommendations of the manufacturer of the particular autoclave should be 
followed in order to provide an adequate pressure/temperature/time cycle to ensure sterilization. 
It is also recommended that plastic autoclaving bags with a color indicator be used to give a 
visual indication that the material is indeed sterile. This is especially important when highly 
potent biological agents are involved. 

The use of sterilization tape is required on all contaminated materials undergoing all types of 
sterilizations listed above. 

LS will test all autoclaves on the Oxford campus twice a year, usually in January and July, for 
proper operation. 

LIQUID DISINFECTION 

An alternative method to dry heat sterilization of sharps, glass, etc. is the disinfection of the 
material using a chemical agent. The recommended method is to soak the sharps, glass, and other 
materials in full strength Chlorox for a period of one hour. Alternative disinfecting agents are: 
70-85% ethanol, 5% formaldehyde solution, and Wescodyne diluted to give 75 ppm of free 
iodine.  

Shipment of Biological Agents 

Refer to the current LS Shipping Policies and regulations 

Recombinant DNA 

1. DNA molecules which are constructed outside living cells by joining foreign* natural or 
foreign* synthetic DNA segments to DNA molecules that can replicate in a living cell; 

2. DNA molecules that result from the replication of those described in (1). Synthetic DNA 
segments likely to yield a potentially harmful polynucleotide or polypeptide (e.g., a toxin or a 
pharmacologically active agent) will be considered as equivalent to their natural DNA 
counterparts. If the synthetic DNA segment is not expressed "in vivo" as a biologically active 
polynucleotide or polypeptide product, it is exempt from the Guidelines. 

*(Rearrangements involving the introduction of DNA from different organisms or different 
strains of an organism will be considered recombinant DNA. Deletions, single-base changes and 
rearrangements within a single genome will not involve the introduction of foreign DNA and 
therefore would not be considered recombinant DNA.) 

GENERAL APPLICABILITY 

The recombinant DNA guidelines are applicable to all recombinant DNA research within the 
United States or its territories which is conducted at or sponsored by an institution that receives 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 8 of 30 

any support for recombinant DNA research from the National Institutes of Health. Any 
individual receiving support for research involving recombinant DNA must be associated with or 
sponsored by an institution that can and does assume the responsibilities assigned in these 
guidelines. 

CONTAINMENT 

Effective biological safety programs have been operative in a variety of laboratories for many 
years. Considerable information exists in the design of physical containment facilities and the 
selection of laboratory procedures applicable to organisms carrying recombinant DNAs. The 
existing programs can be divided into two categories: (i) A set of standard practices that are 
generally used in microbiological laboratories; and (ii) special procedures, equipment, and 
laboratory installations that provide physical barriers which are applied in varying degrees 
according to the estimated biohazard. Four biosafety levels consist of combinations of laboratory 
practices and techniques, safety equipment, and laboratory facilities appropriate for the 
operations performed and the hazards posed by agents and for the laboratory function and 
activity. Biosafety level 4 (BL4) provides the most stringent containment conditions, BL1 the 
least stringent. 

Experiments on recombinant DNAs by their nature lend themselves to a third containment 
mechanism (iii), namely, the application of highly specific biological barriers. In fact, natural 
barriers do exist which limit either (1) the infectivity of a "vector" or "vehicle" (plasmid or virus) 
for specific hosts, or (2) its dissemination and survival in the environment. The vectors that 
provide the means for replication of the recombinant DNAs and/or the host cells in which they 
replicate can be genetically designed to decrease by many orders of magnitude the probability of 
dissemination for recombinant DNAs outside the laboratory. 

 
GUIDELINES FOR COVERED EXPERIMENTS 

Experiments involving recombinant DNA can be divided into four general classes as described 
below. 

A. Experiments which require specific RAC (Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee) review 
and NIH and IBC approval before initiation of the experiment. 

B. Experiments which require IBC approval before initiation of the experiment. 

C. Experiments which require IBC notification at the time of initiation of the experiment. 

D. Experiments which are exempt from the procedures of the GUIDELINES. 

IF AN EXPERIMENT FALLS INTO BOTH CLASS "A" AND ONE OF THE OTHER 
CLASSES, THE RULES PERTAINING TO CLASS "A" MUST BE FOLLOWED! 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 9 of 30 

E. “Class A” Experiments - (require specific RAC (Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee) 
review and NIH and IBC approval before initiation of the experiment). 

Experiments in this category cannot be initiated without submission of relevant information on 
the proposed experiment to NIH, the publication of the Federal Register for thirty days of 
comment, review by the RAC, and specific approval by NIH. Included in this guideline (taken 
from the Federal Register, Vol. 51, No. 88, Wed. May 7, 1986, 16960) are the following criteria. 

1. Deliberate formation of recombinant DNAs containing genes for the biosynthesis of toxic 
molecules lethal for vertebrates at an LD50 of less than 100 ng per kg body weight (e.g., 
microbial toxins such as botulinum toxins, tetanus toxin, diphtheria toxin, Shigella dysenteriae 
neurotoxin). 

2. Deliberate release into the environment of any organism containing DNA. 

3. Deliberate transfer of a drug resistant trait to microorganisms that are not known to acquire it 
naturally if such acquisition could compromise the use of the drug to control disease agents in 
human or veterinary medicine or agriculture. 

4. Deliberate transfer of recombinant DNA or DNA or RNA derived from recombinant DNA 
into human subjects. 

 
F. Class B Experiments - Experiments which require IBC approval before initiation of the 
experiment). 

Investigators performing experiments in this category must submit to their IBC, prior to initiation 
of the experiments, a registration document that contains a description of the source(s) of DNA, 
the nature of the inserted DNA sequences, the hosts and vectors to be used, whether a deliberate 
attempt will be made to obtain expression of a foreign gene, and if so what protein will be 
produced, and the containment conditions specified in this Guideline. Registration document 
must be dated and signed by the investigator and filed only with the local IBC. The IBC shall 
review all such proposals prior to initiation of the experiments. Included in this guideline (taken 
from the Federal Register, Vol. 51, No. 88, Wed. May 7, 1986, 16960) are the following criteria. 

1. Experiments using human or animal pathogens (Class 2, 3, 4, or 5 agents) as host vectors. 

2. Experiments in which DNA from human or animal pathogens (Class 2, 3, 4, or 5) agents is 
cloned into nonpathogenic prokaryoteic or lower eukaryotic host-vector systems. 

3. Experiments involving the use of infectious animal or plant DNA or RNA viruses or defective 
animal or plant DNA or RNA viruses in the presence of helper virus in tissue culture systems. 

4. Recombinant DNA experiments involving whole animals or plants. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 10 of 30 

5. Experiments involving more than 10 liters of culture. (Physical containment for large-scale 
uses of organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules should be used, see appendix K for 
guidelines). 

 
G. Class C Experiments - Experiments which require IBC notification at the time of initiation of 
the experiment. 

Experiments not included in "A or B" categories are to be considered as Class C experiments. 
All such experiments can be carried out at BL1 containment. For experiments in this category, a 
registration document as described in for Class B experiments must be dated and signed by the 
investigator and filed with the local IBC at the time of initiation of the experiment. The IBC shall 
review all such proposals, but IBC review prior to initiation of the experiment is not required. 
For example, experiments in which all components derive from non-pathogenic lower eukaryotes 
fall under Class C experiments and can be carried out at BL1 containment. 

 
H. Class D Experiments - Exempt from Guidelines. 

The following recombinant DNA molecules are exempt from the guidelines for research 
involving recombinant DNA molecules and no registration with the IBC is necessary. 

1. Those that are not in organisms or viruses. 
2. Those that consist entirely of DNA segments from a single nonchromosomal or viral DNA 
source though one or more of the segments may be a synthetic equivalent. 
3. Those that consist entirely of DNA from a prokaryotic host including its indigenous plasmids 
or viruses when propagated only in that host (or a closely related strain of the same species) or 
when transferred to another host by well established physiological means; also, those that consist 
entirely of DNA from an eukaryotic host including its chloroplasts, mitochondria, or plasmids 
(but excluding viruses) when propagated only in that host (or a closely related strain of the same 
species). 4. Certain specified recombinant DNA molecules that consist entirely of DNA 
segments from different species that exchange DNA by known physiological processes though 
one or more of the segments may be a synthetic equivalent. A list of such exchangers will be 
prepared and periodically revised by the Director, NIH, with the advice of the RAC 
(Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee) after appropriate notice and opportunity for public 
comment. 

5. Other classes of recombinant DNA molecules - if the Director, NIH, with advice of the RAC, 
after appropriate notice and opportunity for public comment, finds that they do not present a 
significant risk to health or the environment. 

Regulations for Working with Biohazardous Organisms 

 
CONTAINMENT 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 11 of 30 

The term "containment" is used in describing safe methods for managing infectious agents in the 
laboratory environment where they are being handled or maintained. Primary containment, the 
protection of personnel and the immediate laboratory environment from exposure to infectious 
agents, is provided by good microbiological technique and the use of appropriate safety 
equipment. The use of vaccines may provide an increased level of personal protection. 
Secondary containment, the protection of the environment external to the laboratory from 
exposure to infectious materials, is provided by a combination of facility design and operational 
practices. The purpose of containment is to reduce exposure of laboratory workers and other 
persons to, and to prevent escape into the outside environment of potentially hazardous agents. 
The three elements of containment include laboratory practice and technique, safety equipment, 
and facility design. 

PHYSICAL CONTAINMENT 

The objective of physical containment is to confine pathogenic and organisms containing 
recombinant DNA molecules and thus to reduce the potential for exposure of the laboratory 
worker, persons outside of the laboratory, and the environment to such organisms. Physical 
containment is achieved through the use of laboratory practices, containment equipment, and 
special laboratory design. 

Emphasis is placed on primary means of physical containment which are provided by laboratory 
practices and containment equipment. Special laboratory design provides a secondary means of 
protection against the accidental release of organisms outside the laboratory or to the 
environment. Special laboratory design is used primarily in facilities in which experiments of 
moderate to high potential hazards are performed. 

Combinations of laboratory practices, containment equipment, and special laboratory design can 
be made to achieve different levels of physical containment. Four levels of physical containment, 
which are designated as BL1, BL2, BL3, and BL4, are described. It should be emphasized that 
the descriptions and assignments of physical containment detailed below are based on existing 
approaches to containment of pathogenic organisms. The National Cancer Institute describes 
three levels for research on oncogenic viruses which roughly correspond to the BL2, BL3, and 
BL4 levels. 

It is recognized that several different combinations of laboratory practices, containment 
equipment, and special laboratory design may be appropriate for containment of specific 
research activities. The NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules, 
therefore allow alternative selections of primary containment equipment within facilities that 
have been designed to provide BL3 and BL4 levels of physical containment. The selection of 
alternative methods of primary containment is dependent on the level of biological containment 
provided by the host-vector system used in the experiment. 

LABORATORY PRACTICE AND TECHNIQUE 

The most important element of containment is strict adherence to standard microbiological 
practices and techniques. Persons working with infectious agents or infected materials must be 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 12 of 30 

aware of potential hazards and must be trained and proficient in the practices and techniques 
required for safely handling such material. Included in this training are aseptic techniques and in 
the biology of the organism used in the experiments so that the potential biohazards can be 
understood and appreciated. The principal investigator is responsible for ensuring appropriate 
training of personnel who will be involved with the project. 

When standard laboratory practices are not sufficient to control the hazard associated with a 
particular agent or laboratory procedure, additional measures may be needed. The laboratory 
director is responsible for selecting additional safety practices, which must be in keeping with 
the hazard associated with the particular agent(s) or procedure(s). 

Each laboratory should develop or adopt a biosafety or operations manual which identifies the 
hazards that will or may be encountered and which specifies practices and procedures designed 
to minimize or eliminate risks. Personnel should be advised of special hazards and should be 
required to read and to follow the required practices and procedures. A scientist trained and 
knowledgeable in appropriate laboratory techniques, safety procedures, and hazards associated 
with handling infectious agents must direct laboratory activities. 

Laboratory personnel, safety practices, and techniques must be supplemented by appropriate 
facility design and engineering features, safety equipment, and management practices. 

Any research group working with agents with a known or potential biohazard shall have an 
emergency plan which describes the procedures to be followed if an accident contaminates 
personnel or the environment for each potential biohazard used in the project. The PI must insure 
that everyone in the laboratory is familiar with both the potential hazards of the work and the 
emergency plan. If a research group is working with a known pathogen for which there is an 
effective vaccine, the vaccine should be made available to all workers. 

SAFETY EQUIPMENT (PRIMARY BARRIERS) 

Safety equipment includes biological safety cabinets and a variety of enclosed containers. The 
biological safety cabinet is the principal device used to provide containment of infectious 
aerosols generated by many microbiological procedures. Three types of biological safety 
cabinets (Class I, II, III) used in microbiological laboratories are illustrated in Figures 1-3 and 
described in Appendix A. Open fronted Class I and Class II biological safety cabinets are partial 
containment cabinets which offer significant levels of protection to laboratory personnel and to 
the environment when used with good microbiological techniques. The gas-tight Class III 
biological safety cabinet provides the highest attainable level of protection to personnel and to 
the environment. An example of an enclosed container is the safety centrifuge cup, which is 
designed to prevent aerosols from being released during centrifugation.  

Safety equipment also includes items for personal protection such as gloves, coats, gowns, shoe 
covers, boots, respirators, face shields, and safety glasses. These personal protective devices are 
often used in combination with biological safety cabinets and other devices which contain the 
agents, animals or materials being worked with. In some situations in which it is impractical to 
work in biological safety cabinets, personal protective devices may form the primary barrier 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 13 of 30 

between personnel and the infectious materials. Examples of such activities include certain 
animal studies, animal necropsy, production activities, and activities relating to maintenance 
service, or support of the laboratory facility. 

Regulations for Working with Human Blood, Fluids of Tissue 

Before research involving human blood, blood products, or human pathogens can be undertaken, 
the following requirements must be met prior to the start of the project: 

1. The principal investigator must register the project with the LS. 

2. A written and detailed protocol for the project work must be submitted to LS for review and 
approval by the Institutional Biosafety Committee. The IBC will assign the Biosafety Level for 
the laboratories involved in the project. 

3. The personnel involved in the project must receive safety training proper to the specific 
project as determined by the IBC. 

4. The facilities in which the project is to be carried out must be inspected by LS to determine if 
they meet the Biosafety level assigned to the project. 

5. The safety equipment required by LS for the project must be provided by either the grant or 
the department prior to the start of the project. 

6. The method of biohazardous waste disposal for the specific project must be approved by LS. 

7. Work on each specific project will not start until all safety requirements determined by LS 
have been met and the project is formally approved by LS and the IBC. Written notice of 
approval will be provided on form LS-98 for Blood and Blood Products or on form LS-99 for 
Human Pathogens. 

Guidelines for Handling Human Blood and Blood Products 

 
Many programs in the University require the handling a variety of potentially infectious 
materials. This is especially true of the health care clinics, clinical laboratories, and several of the 
laboratory science programs. Microbiological cultures, urine samples, blood and blood products, 
and the materials and equipment which come into contact with these substances are among the 
sources of biologically hazardous agents in use in typical on-campus research laboratories and 
many laboratory courses. These materials have the ability to transmit pathogenic bacteria and 
blood borne viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B. 

Those who are in contact with the biologically hazardous materials used in the classroom must 
be protected. These include faculty, students, laboratory assistants, housekeeping staff members, 
and refuse handlers. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 14 of 30 

The need to label, correctly store, and properly dispose of hazardous chemicals in the teaching 
laboratory has become widely recognized. Work place safety regulations were once not readily 
applied to college and university classrooms. However, these regulations are now understood to 
apply in the classroom; and state and federal inspectors are beginning to make visits to education 
work sites to ensure that chemicals are handled safely and disposed of properly. So, too, it must 
be recognized that regulations regarding the handling and disposal of infectious materials apply 
to education settings where these materials are used just as they apply to the health care 
providers. Federal regulations of hazardous materials in the work place which apply to clinical 
laboratory education programs are as follows: 

1. Gloves: Disposable gloves are required when performing laboratory tests on blood and body 
fluids or when handling bagged contaminated materials. The regulation does not require wearing 
gloves if venipuncture is performed by students in the teaching setting unless hands are abraded 
or have active dermatitis. However, CDC guidelines recommend that persons who are just 
learning the techniques of venipuncture should wear gloves. 

2. Masks: Masks for eyes and mouth are required when these parts of the body may be exposed 
to infectious materials. The most common times when aerosols or spills of blood occur in the 
clinical laboratory science course are when rubber stoppers are removed from tubes and during 
centrifugation. Sprays and splashes of contaminated fluids may also occur if students are 
required to perform maintenance on machines with hydraulic lines. 

3. Laboratory coats: Laboratory coats or gowns, as well as gloves, must be worn when students 
perform tests on laboratory specimens. 

4. Labeling infectious wastes: Contaminated materials and infectious waste materials must be 
stored in leak proof containers with the word "Biohazard" or the biological hazard symbol 
displayed in a manner which is readable five feet away. Single or double plastic bags which are 
at least 3 mils thick are commonly used. Orange bags are used for materials which remain 
infectious when they leave the classroom laboratory. 

5. Needle disposal: Needles must not be recapped, bent, or broken. They must be placed in a 
dedicated container which is labeled, closable, puncture resistant, and splatter proof. 

6. Training: Training in the proper techniques and types of infectious hazards must be provided 
for instructors and other laboratory personnel who handle infectious material. Records must be 
kept which show that this training has taken place. 

7. Cleaning of spills: A 10% chlorine bleach solution is recommended to disinfect spilled 
infectious material. In addition, the CDC recommends that this type of disinfecting solution 
should be used to clean surfaces and instruments which are knowingly or possibly inadvertently 
contaminated with infectious material. 

8. Storage of infectious waste: Infectious waste can be stored at room temperature for no more 
than 72 hrs. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 15 of 30 

The two acceptable methods for rendering contaminated solid materials noninfectious are steam 
autoclaving and incineration. These two processes require that a steam sterilizer must be 
operated at 250{F for 90 min at 15 psi pressure and that an incinerator must have a burn 
temperature of not less than 1400{F and the gases generated must be subjected to a temperature 
of not less that 1800{F. 

Most clinical laboratory science programs have access to an autoclave and find this to be the 
most economical method of dealing with infectious materials and contaminated solid wastes. 
Autoclave tape should be placed on the bag prior to sterilization to indicate that it has been 
decontaminated. Following steam sterilization, the waste may be placed in the general refuse. 
Not all institutions have access to incinerators, but incineration services may be provided through 
commercial waste handlers. The drawbacks to using a commercial service are the expense and 
the storage time needed between pick-ups. Because education programs generate must less waste 
than health care providers, they may take several weeks to generate enough waste to justify the 
cost of a pick-up by a commercial service. 

The 1987 CDC "Recommendations for the Prevention of HIV Transmission in Health Care 
Settings" suggests that some infective wastes can be poured safely down the drain. The 
recommendations indicate that there is some subjectivity in such a decision. If a substance in a 
residential setting, such as urine, would normally be disposed of by way of the sewer, a similar 
procedure may be used in the health care or clinical education setting. However, if there is a 
question about the proper procedure for disposal, steam sterilization or incineration is 
recommended. 

In the case of known infectious agents, or experiments using human or animal pathogens, the 
principal investigator is referred to procedures outlined previously in "Guidelines for Research 
with Recombinant DNA and Other Biohazardous Organisms. 

Regulations for Working with Animals 

The use of animals for teaching and research is controlled by the Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee (IACUC) which is administered through the Office of Research.  
 

Facility Design 

The design of the facility is important in providing a barrier to protect persons working in the 
facility but outside the laboratory and those in the community from infectious agents which may 
be accidentally released from the laboratory. Laboratory management is responsible for 
providing facilities commensurate with the laboratory's function. Three facility designs are 
described below, in ascending order by level of containment. 

The Basic Laboratory. This laboratory provides general space in which work is done with 
viable agents which are not associated with disease in healthy adults. Basic laboratories include 
those facilities described in the following pages as Biosafety Levels 1 and 2 facilities. This 
laboratory is also appropriate for work with infectious agents or potentially infectious materials 
when the hazard levels are low and laboratory personnel can be adequately protected by standard 
laboratory practice. While work is commonly conducted on the open bench, certain operations 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 16 of 30 

are confined to biological safety cabinets. Conventional laboratory designs are adequate. Areas 
known to be sources of general contamination, such as animal rooms and waste staging areas, 
should not be adjacent to patient care activities. Public areas and general offices to which 
nonlaboratory staff require frequent access should be separated from spaces which primarily 
support laboratory functions. 

The Containment Laboratory. This laboratory has special engineering features which make it 
possible for laboratory workers to handle hazardous materials without endangering themselves, 
the community, or the environment. The containment laboratory is described in the following 
pages as a Biosafety Level 3 facility. The unique features which distinguish this laboratory from 
the basic laboratory are the provisions for access control and a specialized ventilation system. 
The containment laboratory may be an entire building or a single module or complex of modules 
within a building. In all cases, the laboratory is separated by a controlled access zone from areas 
open to the public. 

The Maximum Containment Laboratory. This laboratory has special engineering and 
containment features that allow activities involving infectious agents that are extremely 
hazardous to the laboratory worker or that may cause serious epidemic disease to be conducted 
safely. The maximum containment laboratory is described on the following pages as a biosafety 
Level 4 facility. Although the maximum containment laboratory is generally a separate building, 
it can be constructed as an isolated area within a building. The laboratory's distinguishing 
characteristic is that it has secondary barriers to prevent hazardous materials from escaping into 
the environment. Such barriers include sealed openings into the laboratory, airlocks or liquid 
disinfectant barriers, a clothing-change and shower room contiguous to the laboratory, a double 
door autoclave, a biowaste treatment system, a separate ventilation system, and a treatment 
system to decontaminate exhaust air. 

Biosafety Level 1 

Practices, safety equipment, and facilities are appropriate for undergraduate and secondary 
educational training and teaching laboratories and for other facilities in which work is done with 
defined and characterized strains of viable microorganisms not known to cause disease in healthy 
adult humans. Bacillus subtilis, Naegleria gruberi, and infectious canine hepatitis virus are 
representative of those microorganisms meeting these criteria. Many agents not ordinarily 
associated with disease processes in humans are, however, opportunistic pathogens and may 
cause infection in the young, the aged, and in immunodeficient or immunosuppressed 
individuals.  

Biosafety Level 1 is suitable for work involving agents of no known or of minimal potential 
hazard to laboratory personnel and the environment. The laboratory is not separated from the 
general traffic patterns in the building. Work is generally conducted on open bench tops. Special 
containment equipment is not required or generally used. Laboratory personnel have specific 
training in the procedures conducted in the laboratory and are supervised by a scientist with 
general training in microbiology or a related science. The following standard and special 
practices, safety equipment, and facilities apply to agents assigned to  

Biosafety Level 1: 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 17 of 30 

A. Standard Microbiological Practices 

1. Access to the laboratory is limited or restricted at the discretion of the laboratory director 
when experiments are in progress. 

2. Work surfaces are decontaminated once a day and after any spill of viable material. 

3. All contaminated liquid or solid wastes are decontaminated before disposal.  

4. Mechanical pipetting devices are used; mouth pipetting is prohibited. 

5. Eating, drinking, smoking, and applying cosmetics are not permitted in the work area. Food 
may be stored in cabinets or refrigerators designated and used for this purpose only. Food storage 
cabinets or refrigerators should be located outside of the work area. 

6. Persons wash their hands after they handle viable materials and animals and before leaving the 
laboratory. 

7. All procedures are performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols. 

8. It is recommended that laboratory coats, gowns, or uniforms be worn to prevent contamination 
or soiling of street clothes. 

B. Special Practices 

1. Contaminated materials that are to be decontaminated at a site away from the laboratory are 
placed in a durable leakproof container which is closed before being removed from the 
laboratory. 

2. An insect and rodent control program is in effect. 

C. Special containment equipment is generally not required for manipulations of agents assigned 
to Biosafety Level 1. 

D. Laboratory Facilities 

1. The laboratory is designed so that it can be easily cleaned. 

2. Bench tops are impervious to water and resistant to acids, alkalis, organic solvents, and 
moderate heat. 

3. Laboratory furniture is sturdy. Spaces between benches, cabinets, and equipment are 
accessible for cleaning. 

4. Each laboratory contains a sink for handwashing. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 18 of 30 

5. If the laboratory has windows that open, they are fitted with fly screens. 

Biosafety Level 2 

Practices, equipment, and facilities are applicable to clinical, diagnostic, teaching and other 
facilities in which work is done with the broad spectrum of indigenous moderate-risk agents 
present in the community and associated with human disease of varying severity. With good 
microbiological techniques, these agents can be used safely in activities conducted on the open 
bench, provided the potential for producing aerosols is low. Hepatitis B virus, the salmonellae, 
and Toxoplasma spp. are representative of microorganisms assigned to this containment level. 
Primary hazards to personnel working with these agents may include accidental autoinoculation, 
ingestion, and skin or mucous membrane exposure to infectious materials. Procedures with high 
aerosol potential that may increase the risk of exposure of personnel must be conducted in 
primary containment equipment or devices. 

Biosafety Level 2 is similar to Level 1 and is suitable for work involving agents of moderate 
potential hazard to personnel and the environment. It differs in that: 

a) laboratory personnel have specific training in handling pathogenic agents and are directed 
by competent scientists,  

b) access to the laboratory is limited when work is being conducted, and,  
c) Certain procedures in which infectious aerosols are created are conducted in biological 

safety cabinets or other physical containment equipment. 

The following standard and special practices safety equipment, and facilities apply to agents 
assigned to biosafety Level 2.  

A. Standard Microbiological Practices 

1. Access to the laboratory is limited or restricted by the laboratory director when work with 
infectious agents or recombinant DNA molecules is in progress. 

2. Work surfaces are decontaminated at least once a day and after any spill of viable material. 

3. All infectious liquid or solid wastes are decontaminated before disposal. 

4. Mechanical pipetting devices are used; mouth pipetting is prohibited.  

5. Eating, drinking, smoking, and applying cosmetics are not permitted in the work area. Food 
may be stored in cabinets or refrigerators designated and used for this purpose only. Food storage 
cabinets or refrigerators should be located outside of the work area. 

6. Persons wash their hands after handling infectious materials or organisms containing 
recombinant DNA molecules, animals, and when they leave the laboratory.  

7. All procedures are performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 19 of 30 

8. Experiments of lesser biohazard potential can be carried out concurrently in carefully 
demarcated areas of the same laboratory. 

B. Special Practices 

1. Contaminated materials that are to be decontaminated at a site away from the laboratory are 
placed in a durable leakproof container which is closed before being removed from the 
laboratory. 

2. The laboratory director limits access to the laboratory. The director has the final responsibility 
for assessing each circumstance and determining who may enter or work in the laboratory. 

3. The laboratory director establishes policies and procedures whereby only persons who have 
been advised of the potential hazard and meet any specific entry requirements (e.g., 
immunization) enter the laboratory and animal rooms. 

4. When the infectious agent(s) or organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules are in use 
in the laboratory require special provisions for entry (e.g.,vaccination), a hazard warning sign, 
incorporating the universal biohazard symbol, is posted on the access door to the laboratory work 
area. The hazard warning sign identifies the infectious agent, lists the name and telephone 
number of the laboratory director or other responsible person(s), and indicates the special 
requirement(s) for entering the laboratory. 

5. An insect and rodent control program is in effect. 

6. Laboratory coats, gowns, smocks, or uniforms are worn while in the laboratory. Before 
leaving the laboratory for non-laboratory areas (e.g., cafeteria, library administrative offices), 
this protective clothing is removes and left in the laboratory or covered with a clean coat not 
used in the laboratory. 

7. Animals not involved in the work being performed are not permitted in the laboratory. 

8. Special care is taken to avoid skin contamination with infectious materials or organisms 
containing recombinant DNA molecules; gloves should be worn when handling experimental 
animals and when skin contact with the agent is unavoidable. 

9. All wastes from laboratories and animal rooms are appropriately decontaminated before 
disposal. 

10. Hypodermic needles and syringes are used only for parenteral injection and aspiration of 
fluids from laboratory animals and diaphragm bottles. Only needle-locking syringes or 
disposable syringe-needle units (i.e., needle is integral to the syringe) are used for the injection or 
aspiration of fluids containing organism that contain recombinant DNA molecules or infectious 
agents. Extreme caution should be used when handling needles and syringes to avoid 
autoinoculation and the generation of aerosols during use and disposal. Needles should not be 
bent, sheared, replaced in the sheath or guard or removed from the syringe following use. The 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 20 of 30 

needle and syringe should be promptly placed in a puncture-resistant container and 
decontaminated, preferably by autoclaving, before discard or reuse. 

11. Spills and accidents which result in overt exposures to infectious materials or organisms that 
contain recombinant DNA molecules are immediately reported to the laboratory director. 
Medical evaluation, surveillance, and treatment are provided as appropriate and written records 
are maintained. 

12. When appropriate, considering the agent(s) handled, baseline serum samples for laboratory 
and other at-risk personnel are collected and stored. Additional serum specimens may be 
collected periodically, depending on the agents handled or the function of the facility. 

13. A biosafety manual is prepared or adopted. Personnel are advised of special hazards are 
required to read instructions on practices and procedures and to follow them. 

C. Containment Equipment  

Biological safety cabinets (Class I or II) (see Appendix A) or other appropriate personal 
protective or physical containment devices are used whenever: 

1. Procedures with a high potential for creating infectious aerosols are conducted. These may 
include centrifuging, grinding, blending, vigorous shaking or mixing, sonic disruption, opening 
containers of infectious materials whose internal pressures may be different from ambient 
pressures, inoculating animals intranasally, and harvesting infected tissues from animals or eggs. 

2. High concentrations or large volumes of infectious agents are used. Such materials may be 
centrifuged in the open laboratory if sealed heads or centrifuge safety caps are used and if they 
are opened only in a biological safety cabinet. 

D. Laboratory Facilities 

1. The laboratory is designed so that it can be easily cleaned. 

2. Bench tops are impervious to water and resistant to acids, alkalis, organic solvents, and 
moderate heat. 

3. Laboratory furniture is sturdy, and spaces between benches, cabinets, and equipment are 
accessible for cleaning. 

4. Each laboratory contains a sink for handwashing. 

5. If the laboratory has windows that open, they are fitted with fly screens. 

6. An autoclave for decontaminating infectious laboratory wastes is available. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 21 of 30 

Biosafety Level 3 

Practices, safety equipment, and facilities are applicable to clinical, diagnostic, teaching, 
research, or production facilities in which work is done with indigenous or exotic agents where 
the potential for infection by aerosols is real and the disease may have serious or lethal 
consequences. Autoinoculation and ingestion also represent primary hazards to personnel 
working with these agents. Examples of such agents for which Biosafety Level 3 safeguards are 
generally recommended include Mycobacterium tuberculosis, St. Louis encephalitis virus, and 
Coxiella burnetii. 

Biosafety Level 3 is applicable to clinical, diagnostic, teaching, research, or production facilities 
in which work is done with indigenous or exotic agents which may cause serious or potentially 
lethal disease as a result of exposure by the inhalation route. Laboratory personnel have specific 
training in handling pathogenic and potentially lethal agents and are supervised by competent 
scientists who are experienced in working with these agents. All procedures involving the 
manipulation of infectious material are conducted within biological safety cabinets or other 
physical containment devices or by personnel wearing appropriate personal protective clothing 
and devices. The laboratory has special engineering and design features. It is recognized, 
however, that many existing facilities may not have all the facility safe-guards recommended for 
Biosafety Level 3 (e.g., access zone, sealed penetrations, and directional airflow, etc.). In these 
circumstances, acceptable safety may be achieved for routine or repetitive operations (e.g., 
diagnostic procedures involving the propagation of an agent for identification, typing, and 
susceptibility testing) in laboratories where facility features satisfy Biosafety Level 2 
recommendations provided the recommended "Standard Microbiological Practices," "Special 
Practices,"and "Containment Equipment"for Biosafety Level 3 are rigorously followed. The 
decision to implement this modification of Biosafety Level 3 recommendations should be made 
only by the laboratory director. 

The following standard and special safety practices, equipment and facilities apply to agents 
assigned to Biosafety Level 3. 

A. Standard Microbiological Practices 

1. Work surfaces are decontaminated at least once a day and after any spill of viable material. 

2. All infectious liquid or solid wastes are decontaminated before disposal. 

3. Mechanical pipetting devices are used; mouth pipetting is prohibited. 

4. Eating, drinking, smoking, storing food and applying cosmetics are not permitted in the work 
area.  

5. Persons wash their hands after handling infectious materials, animals, organisms that contain 
recombinant DNA molecules and when they leave the laboratory. 

6. All procedures are performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 22 of 30 

7. Persons under 16 years of age shall not enter the laboratory. 

8. If experiments involving other organisms which require lower levels of containment are to be 
conducted in the same laboratory concurrently with experiments requiring BL3 level physical 
containment, they shall be conducted in accordance with all BL3 level laboratory practices. 

B. Special Practices 

1. Laboratory doors are kept closed when experiments are in progress. 

2. Contaminated materials that are to be decontaminated at a site away from the laboratory are 
placed in a durable leak proof container which is closed before being removed from the 
laboratory. 

3. The laboratory director controls access to the laboratory and restricts access to persons whose 
presence is required for program or support purposes. The director has the final responsibility for 
assessing each circumstance and determining who may enter or work in the laboratory. 

4. The laboratory director establishes policies and procedures whereby only persons who have 
been advised of the potential biohazard, who meet any specific entry requirements (e.g., 
immunization), and who comply with all entry and exit procedures enter the laboratory or animal 
rooms. 

5. When infectious materials or organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules or 
experimental animals are present in the laboratory or containment module, a hazard warning 
sign, incorporating the universal biohazard symbol, is posted on all laboratory and animal room 
access doors. The hazard warning sign identifies the agent, lists the name and telephone number 
of the laboratory director or other responsible person(s), and indicates any special requirements 
for entering the laboratory, such as the need for immunizations, respirators, or other personal 
protective measures. 

6. All activities involving infectious materials or organisms containing recombinant DNA 
molecules are conducted in biological safety cabinets or other physical containment devices 
within the containment module. No work in open vessels is conducted on the open bench. 

7. The work surfaces of biological safety cabinets and other containment equipment are 
decontaminated when work with infectious materials or organisms containing recombinant DNA 
molecules is finished. Plastic-backed paper toweling used on non-perforated work surfaces 
within biological safety cabinets facilitates clean-up. 

8. An insect and rodent control program is in effect. 

9. Laboratory clothing that protects street clothing (e.g., solid front or wrap-around gowns, scrub 
suits, coveralls) is worn in the laboratory. Laboratory clothing is not worn outside the laboratory, 
and it is decontaminated before being laundered. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 23 of 30 

10. Special care is taken to avoid skin contamination with infectious materials or organisms 
containing recombinant DNA molecules; gloves should be worn when handling infected animals 
and when skin contact with infectious materials is unavoidable. 

11. Molded surgical masks or respirators are worn in rooms containing infected animals. 

12. Animals and plants not related to the work being conducted are not permitted in the 
laboratory. 

13. Laboratory animals held in a BL# area shall be housed in partial-containment caging systems 
such as Horsfall units, open cages placed in ventilated enclosures, solid-wall and bottom cages 
covered by filter bonnets on holding racks equipped with ultraviolet in radiation lamps and 
reflectors. Note: Conventional caging systems may be used provided that all personnel wear 
appropriate personal protective devices. These shall include at a minimum wraparound gowns, 
head covers, gloves, shoe covers, and respirators. All personnel shall shower on exit from areas 
where these devices are required. 

14. All wastes from laboratories and animal rooms are appropriately decontaminated before 
disposal. 

15. Vacuum lines are protected with high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters and liquid 
disinfectant traps. 

16. Hypodermic needles and syringes are used only for parenteral injection and aspiration of 
fluids from laboratory animals and diaphragm bottles. Only needle-locking syringes or 
disposable syringe-needle units (i.e., needle is integral to the syringe) are used for the infection 
or aspiration of infectious fluids or organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules. Extreme 
caution should be used when handling needles and syringes to avoid autoinoculation and the 
generation of aerosols during use and disposal. Needles should not be bent, sheared, replaced in 
the sheath or guard or removed from the syringe following use. The needle and syringe should be 
promptly placed in a puncture-resistant container and decontaminated, preferably by autoclaving, 
before discard or reuse. 

17. Spills and accidents which result in overt or potential exposures to infectious materials or 
organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules are immediately reported to the laboratory 
director. Appropriate medical evaluation, surveillance, and treatment are provided and written 
records are maintained. 

18. Baseline serums samples for all laboratory and other at-risk personnel should be collected 
and stores. Additional serum specimens may be collected periodically, depending on the agents 
handled or the function of the laboratory. 

19. A biosafety manual is prepared or adopted. Personnel are advised of special hazards and are 
required to read instructions on practices and procedures and to follow them. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 24 of 30 

20. Alternate Selection of Containment Equipment- Experimental procedures involving a host-
vector system that provides a one-step higher level of biological containment than that specified 
can be conducted in a BL3 laboratory using containment equipment specified for the BL2 level 
of physical containment. Experimental procedures involving a host-vector system that provides a 
one-step lower level of biological containment than that specified can be conducted in a BL3 
laboratory using containment equipment specified for the BL4 level of physical containment. 

C. Containment Equipment 

Biological safety cabinets (Class I, II, or III) or other appropriate combinations of personal 
protective or physical containment devices (e.g., special protective clothing, masks, gloves, 
respirators, centrifuge safety cups, sealed centrifuge rotors, and containment caging for animals) 
are used for all activities with organisms containing recombinant DNA molecules which pose a 
threat of aerosol exposure. These include manipulation of cultures and of those clinical or 
environmental materials which may be a source of aerosols; the aerosol challenge of 
experimental animals; and harvesting of infected tissues or fluids from experimental animals and 
embryonate eggs; and necroscopy of experimental animals. 

D. Laboratory Facilities 

1. The laboratory is separated from areas which are open to unrestricted personnel traffic within 
the building. Passage through two sets of doors is the basic requirement for entry into the animal 
room from access corridors or other contiguous areas. Physical separation of the high 
containment laboratory from access corridors or other activities may also be provided by a 
double doored clothes change room (showers may be included), airlock, or other access facility 
which requires passage through two sets of doors before entering the laboratory. 

2. The interior surfaces of walls, floors, and ceilings are water resistant so that they may be easily 
cleaned. Penetrations in these surfaces are sealed or capable of being sealed to facilitate 
decontaminating the area. 

3. Bench tops are impervious to water and resistant to acids, alkalis, organic solvents, and 
moderate heat. 

4. Laboratory furniture is sturdy and spaces between benches, cabinets, and equipment are 
accessible for cleaning. 

5. Each laboratory contains a sink for handwashing. The sink is foot, elbow, or automatically 
operated and is located near the laboratory exit door. 

6. Windows in the laboratory are closed and sealed. 

7. Access doors to the laboratory or containment module are self-closing. 

8. An autoclave for decontaminating laboratory wastes is available, preferably within the 
laboratory.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 25 of 30 

9. A duct exhaust air ventilation system is provided. This system creates directional airflow that 
draws air into the laboratory through the entry area. The building exhaust can be used for this 
purpose if the exhaust air is not recirculated to any other area of the building, is discharged to the 
outside, and is dispersed away from occupied areas and air intakes. Personnel must verify that 
the direction of the airflow (into the laboratory) is proper. The exhaust air from the animal room 
that does not pass through biological safety cabinets or other primary containment equipment can 
be discharged to the outside without being filtered or otherwise treated.  

8. The HEPA filtered exhaust air from Class I or Class II biological safety cabinets or other 
primary containment devices is discharged directly to the outside or through the building exhaust 
system. Exhaust air from these primary containment devices may be recirculated within the 
laboratory if the cabinet is tested and certified at least every 12 months. If the HEPA filtered 
exhaust air from Class I or Class II biological safety cabinets is discharged to the outside through 
the building exhaust system, it is connected to this system in a manner (e.g., thimble unit 
connection) that avoids any interference with the air balance of the cabinets or building exhaust 
system. 

Animal Biosafety Level 1 

A. Standard Practices 

1. Doors to animal rooms open inward, are self-closing, and are kept closed when experimental 
animals are present. 

2. Work surfaces are decontaminated once a day and after any spill of viable material. 

3. Eating, drinking, smoking, and applying cosmetics are not permitted in the animal rooms.  

4. Persons wash their hands after they handle viable materials and animals and before leaving the 
laboratory. 

5. All procedures are performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols. 

6. An insect and rodent control program is in effect. 

B. Special Practices 

1. Bedding materials from animal cages are removed in such a manner as to minimize the 
creation of aerosols and disposed of in compliance with applicable institutional or local 
requirements. 

2. Cages are washed manually or in a cage washer. Temperature of the final rinse water in a 
mechanical washer should be 180oF. 

3. The wearing of laboratory coats, gowns, or uniforms in the animal room is recommended. It is 
further recommended that laboratory coats worn in the animal room not be worn in other areas. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 26 of 30 

C. Containment Equipment  

Special containment equipment is not required for animals infected with agents assigned to 
Biosafety Level 1. 

D. Animal Facilities 

1. The animal facility is designed and constructed to facilitate cleaning and housekeeping. 

2. A handwashing sink is available in the animal facility. 

3. If the animal facility has windows that open, they are fitted with fly screens. 

4. It is recommended but not required that the direction of air flow in the animal facility is 
inward and that exhaust air is discharged to the outside without being recirculated to other 
rooms.  

Animal Biosafety Level 2 

A. Standard Practices 

1. Doors to animal rooms open inward, are self-closing, and are kept closed when experimental 
animals are present. 

2. Work surfaces are decontaminated once a day and after any spill of viable material. 

3. Eating, drinking, smoking, and applying cosmetics are not permitted in the animal rooms. 

4. Persons wash their hands after they handle viable materials and animals and before leaving the 
laboratory. 

5. All procedures are performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols. 

6. An insect and rodent control program is in effect. 

B. Special Practices 

1. Cages are decontaminated, preferably by autocalving, before they are cleaned and washed. 

2. Surgical-type masks are worn by all personnel entering animal rooms housing nonhuman 
primates. 

3. Laboratory coats, gowns, or uniforms are worn while in the animal room. This protective 
clothing is removed before leaving the animal facility. 

4. The laboratory or animal facility director limits access to the animal room to personnel who 
have been advised of the potential hazard and who need to enter the room for program or service 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 27 of 30 

purposes when work is in progress. In general, persons who may be at increased risk of acquiring 
infection or for whom infection might be unusually hazardous are not allowed in the animal 
room. 

5. The laboratory or animal facility director establishes policies and procedures where only 
persons who have been advised of the potential hazard and meet any specific requirements (e.g. 
for immunization) may enter the animal room. 

6. When the infectious agent(s) in use in the animal room requires special entry provisions (e.g. 
vaccination), a hazard warning sign, incorporating the universal biohazard symbol, is posted on 
the access door to the animal room. The hazard warning sign identifies the infectious agent, lists 
the name and telephone number of the animal facility supervisor or other responsible persons(s), 
and indicates the special requirement(s) for entering the animal room. 

7. Special care is taken to avoid skin contamination with infectious materials; gloves should be 
worn when handling infected animals and when skin contact with infectious materials is 
unavoidable. 

8. All wastes from the animal room are appropriately decontaminated-preferably by autoclaving-
before disposal. Infected animal carcasses are incinerated off site after being transported from the 
animal room in leakproof, covered containers. 

9. Hypodermic needles and syringes are used only for the parenteral injection or aspiration of 
fluids from laboratory animals and diaphragm bottles. Only needle-locking syringes or 
disposable needle syringe units (i.e. the needle is integral to the syringe) are used for the 
injection or aspiration of infectious fluids. Needles should not be bent, sheared, replaced in the 
sheath or guard, or removed from the syringe following use. The needle and syringe should be 
promptly placed in a puncture-resistant container and decontaminated, preferably by autoclaving, 
before discard or reuse. 

10. If floor drains are provided, the drain traps are always filled with water or a suitable 
disinfectant. 

11. When appropriate, considering the agents handled, baseline serum samples from animal care 
and other at-risk personnel are collected and stored. Additional serum samples may be collected 
periodically, depending on the agents handled or the function of the facility. 

C. Containment Equipment 

Biological safety cabinets, other physical containment devices, and/or personal protective 
devices (e.g., respirators, face shields) are used whenever procedures with a high potential for 
creating aerosols are conducted. These include necroscopy of infected animals, harvesting of 
infected tissues or fluids from animals or eggs, intranasal inoculation of animals, and 
manipulation of high concentrations or large volumes of infectious materials. 

D. Animal Facilities  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 28 of 30 

1. The animal facility is designed and constructed to facilitate cleaning and housekeeping. 

2. A handwashing sink is available in the animal facility where infected animals are housed. 

3. If the animal facility has windows that open, they are fitted with fly screens. 

4. It is recommended but not required that the direction of air flow in the animal facility is 
inward and that exhaust air is discharged to the outside without being recirculated to other 
rooms. 

5. An autoclave which can be used for decontaminating infectious laboratory waste is available 
in the building with the animal facility.  

Animal Biosafety Level 3 

A. Standard Practices 

1. Doors to animal rooms open inward, are self-closing, and are kept closed when experimental 
animals are present. 

2. Work surfaces are decontaminated after use or spills of viable materials. 

3. Eating, drinking, smoking, and applying cosmetics are not permitted in the animal rooms. 

4. Persons wash their hands after they handling cultures and animals and before leaving the 
laboratory. 

5. All procedures are performed carefully to minimize the creation of aerosols. 

6. An insect and rodent control program is in effect. 

B. Special Practices 

1. Cages are autoclaved before bedding is removed and before they are cleaned and washed. 

2. Surgical-type masks or other respiratory protection devices (e.g. respirators) are worn by 
personnel entering animal rooms housing animals infected with agents assigned to Biosafety 
level 3. 

3. Wrap-around or solid front gowns or uniforms are worn by personnel entering the animal 
room. Front-button laboratory coats are unsuitable. Protective must remain in the animal room 
and must be decontaminated before being laundered. 

4. The laboratory or animal facility director restricts access to the animal room to personnel who 
have been advised of the potential hazard and who need to enter the room for program or service 
purposes when infected animals are present. In general, persons who may be at increased risk of 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 29 of 30 

acquiring infection or for whom infection might be unusually hazardous are not allowed in the 
animal room. 

5. The laboratory director or other responsible person establishes policies and procedures 
whereby only persons who have been advised of the potential hazard and meet any specific 
requirements (e.g. for immunization) may enter the animal room. 

6. Hazard warning signs, incorporating the universal biohazard symbol is posted on the access 
door to the animal room containing animals infected with agents assigned to Biosafety level 3 
are present. The hazard warning sign should identify the agent(s) in use, list the name and 
telephone number of the animal facility supervisor or other responsible persons(s), and indicates 
the special conditions of entry into the animal room (e.g., the need for immunizations or 
respirators). 

7. Personnel wear gloves when handling infected animals. Gloves are removed aseptically and 
autoclaved with other animal room wastes before being disposed or reused. 

8. All wastes from the animal room are autoclaved before disposal.  

9. Hypodermic needles and syringes are used only for gavage or parenteral injection or aspiration 
of fluids from laboratory animals and diaphragm bottles. Only needle-locking syringes or 
disposable needle syringe units (i.e. the needle is integral to the syringe) are used for the 
injection or aspiration of infectious fluids. Needles should not be bent, sheared, replaced in the 
sheath or guard, or removed from the syringe following use. The needle and syringe should be 
promptly placed in a puncture-resistant container and decontaminated, preferably by autoclaving, 
before discard or reuse. 

10. If floor drains are provided, the drain traps are always filled with water or a suitable 
disinfectant. 

11. If vacuum lines are provided, they are protected with HEPA filters and liquid disinfectant 
traps. 

12. Boots, shoe covers, or other protective footwear and disinfectant footbaths are available and 
used when indicated. 

C. Containment Equipment 

1. Personal protective clothing and equipment and/or other physical containment devices are 
used for all procedures and manipulations of infectious materials or infected animals. 

2. The risk of infectious aerosols from infected animals or their bedding can be reduced if the 
animals are housed in partial containment caging systems, such as open cages placed in 
ventilated enclosures (e.g., laminar flow cabinets) solid wall and bottom cages covered by filter 
bonnets, or other equivalent primary containment systems. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 30 of 30 

D. Animal Facilities 

1. The animal facility is designed and constructed to facilitate cleaning and housekeeping and is 
separated for areas which are open to unrestricted personnel traffic within the building. Passage 
through two sets of doors is the basic requirement for entry into the animal room from access 
corridors or other contiguous areas. Physical separation of the animal room from access corridors 
or other activities may also be provided by a double doored clothes change room (showers may 
be included), airlock, or other access facility which requires passage through two sets of doors 
before entering the animal room. 

2. The interior surfaces of walls, floors, and ceilings are water resistant so that they may be easily 
cleaned. Penetrations in these surfaces are sealed or capable of being sealed to facilitate 
fumigation or space decontamination. 

3. A foot, elbow, or automatically operated handwashing sink is provided near each animal room 
exit door. 

4. Windows in the animal room are closed and sealed. 

5. Animal room doors are self-closing and are kept closed when infected animals are present. 

6. An autoclave which for decontaminating wastes is available, preferably within the animal 
room. Materials to be autoclaved outside the animal room are transported in a covered leakproof 
container. 

7. An exhaust air ventilation system is provided. This system creates directional airflow that 
draws air into the animal room through the entry area. The building exhaust can be used for this 
purpose if the exhaust air is not recirculated to any other area of the building, is discharged to the 
outside, and is dispersed away from occupied areas and air intakes. Personnel must verify that 
the direction of the airflow (into the animal room) is proper. The exhaust air from the animal 
room that does not pass through biological safety cabinets or other primary containment 
equipment can be discharged to the outside without being filtered or otherwise treated. 

8. The HEPA filtered exhaust air from Class I or Class II biological safety cabinets or other 
primary containment devices is discharged directly to the outside or through the building exhaust 
system. Exhaust air from these primary containment devices may be recirculated within the 
animal room if the cabinet is tested and certified at least every 12 months. If the HEPA filtered 
exhaust air from Class I or Class II biological safety cabinets is discharged to the outside through 
the building exhaust system, it is connected to this system in a manner (e.g., thimble unit 
connection) that avoids any interference with the air balance of the cabinets or building exhaust 
system. 


