
Page 1 of 8 
 

The University of Mississippi 
 

Promotions (Academic) 
 
 
I. Introductory Statement 
 
Promotion to any rank is a recognition of past achievement and a sign of confidence that the 
individual is capable of greater responsibilities and accomplishments. This document is intended 
to set forth institutional policy for the promotion of faculty who hold professorial rank. 
Additional policy statements shall be adopted by departments/units and schools and shall be 
consistent with general University policy. 
 
 
II. Criteria for Promotion 
 
Each faculty member who receives a professorial-rank appointment shall be provided a copy (by 
the department/unit chair/dean/unit director at the time of appointment) of the approved 
guidelines with respect to research or creative achievement, teaching, and service that he or she 
is expected to meet in order to be recommended for promotion to a higher rank. Faculty 
members holding joint academic appointments must be informed in writing at the time of their 
appointment precisely what the role of each of the academic units in which the appointment is to 
be held will have with regard to decisions concerning promotion. At that time, the faculty 
member must be given, in writing, the guidelines or standards of each of the units, the methods 
to be used for informing the faculty member of his or her progress toward promotion, and a 
statement about how possible disagreements between units will be handled. Should the standards 
be altered, each faculty member shall receive written notification of the changes from the chair 
or dean. The actual emphasis given to each of these three categories of activity should be 
suitably proportioned to reflect the varying responsibilities of each department/unit or school to 
the University's overall mission. The Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs 
shall have the responsibility of assuring that each school's or department's/unit's standards are 
consistent with the University's mission. 
 
In applying the following general guidelines, one should note that three or even four years are 
generally too brief a period in which to justify promotion to associate professor. Therefore, a 
recommendation for promotion before the five-year period should be rare and special. Promotion 
to associate professor or professor prior to the completion of the candidate's tenure probationary 
period in no way assures the candidate of a favorable tenure decision. Although there are special 
cases in which it will be acceptable to award tenure without concurrent or subsequent promotion 
to the rank of associate professor or higher, these cases should be limited to special 
circumstances. 
 
The following definitions are intended to guide faculty and appropriate administrators in their 
evaluation of candidates for promotion. Each school or department/unit shall develop guidelines 
within this general framework which reflect its role in the University's mission. These guidelines 
require approval by the appropriate dean and subsequently by the Provost/Executive Vice 
Chancellor for Academic Affairs and by the Chancellor.  Parts of the guidelines below apply 



Page 2 of 8 
 

only to tenure track faculty members. In general, directions which apply only to research faculty 
are specified. 
 

A. Research or Creative Achievement: In order to maintain the highest professional 
standards, one must judge a faculty member's accomplishments in research and creative 
achievement against the prevailing professional standards of the faculty member's 
academic discipline. Achievements in this area should make contributions to the 
expansion of knowledge and indicate the continuing professional vitality of the candidate. 
Examples of such activity include, but are not limited to, books or journals published by 
commercial or university presses; articles in refereed or other scholarly professional 
journals with international, national, or regional reputations; papers read at scholarly 
conferences; editorial work; receipt of research grants, or contracts which support 
continued research; publications or performances of musical compositions; art 
exhibitions; and the production of plays, motion pictures, records, or video tapes. 
 
B. Teaching: Teaching is central to the University's mission. Since it is difficult to 
evaluate teaching with precision, information on a faculty member's classroom 
performance and related activities should be gathered from a wide variety of sources. 
Student evaluations (when available), peer evaluations, information about student 
advisement, evidence of the nominee's ability to motivate a wide range of students, 
development of new instructional techniques and teaching materials, publication of 
textbooks or other materials which indicate an interest in teaching, direction of 
dissertations and theses, receipt of educational contracts which support teaching, and 
teaching awards are examples of the types of information or evidence of activities needed 
to make an informed judgment on the faculty member's qualifications as a teacher. 
 
C. Service: Service refers to the application of professional expertise which contributes to 
the solution of problems faced by modern society and which enriches the life of the larger 
community served by the University. Service is related to the faculty member's academic 
discipline and includes such varied activities as consultantships, clinical activities, 
editorial work for professional organizations, and other forms of funded and unfunded 
public service. Faculty contributions to University, school, or departmental activities and 
governance shall also be considered in evaluation of service. 
 

 
III. Promotion in Rank 
 
When a faculty member is being considered for promotion, his or her contributions should be 
assessed in regard to all three criteria from the preceding section. See the section on Criteria for 
Promotion for information about promotion procedures for persons holding joint appointments. 
Favorable action should result when the individual has demonstrated a level of competence and 
distinction appropriate to the proposed rank. Under no circumstances should a person be 
promoted to a higher rank without evidence of scholarly research or creative achievement. 
Additionally, no recommendation for promotion shall be made for teaching faculty without 



Page 3 of 8 
 

evidence of the candidate's effectiveness as a teacher. Service to the University, profession, or 
community should be discharged with merit and should reflect favorably on the University and 
on the individual's academic status. 
 
Both because experience in the academic profession is of value in itself and because for 
promotion there should be evidence of continued excellence and productivity, minimum periods 
of service in one rank will be expected before promotion to the next. While the requirement for 
minimum service in an academic rank is not absolute and rigid, exceptions will be made only on 
the basis of documented exceptional performance in all areas of teaching, service, and research 
or creative achievement. Credit for time in rank on the basis of professional experience may be 
negotiated at the time of employment. 
 

A. From Assistant Professor to Associate Professor: The advancement from assistant 
professor to associate professor is based on quality of teaching, research and creative 
achievement, and performance of service roles. The general requirement is that one 
should serve five years in the rank of assistant professor before being considered for 
promotion to associate professor. The faculty member will thus be considered for 
promotion during his or her sixth year of service, and the promotion will become 
effective at the beginning of the seventh year. 
 
If teaching is a primary criterion, it should be distinctly superior to that of effective 
teachers at this and other major institutions. If research or other creative work is a 
primary criterion, the candidate should have demonstrated a broad grasp of his or her 
own and related fields and should be establishing a national reputation as a scholar. A 
definite and comprehensive plan of future research covering a number of years and a 
beginning thereon which extends well beyond the limits of that presented for the terminal 
degree should be evident. 

 
B. From Associate Professor to Professor: The advancement from associate professor to 
professor is based upon achievement beyond the level required for the associate 
professor. The general requirement is that one should serve six years in the rank of 
associate professor before being considered for promotion to professor. The faculty 
member will thus be considered for promotion during his or her seventh year in rank as 
associate professor, and the promotion will become effective at the beginning of the 
eighth year. 
 
If teaching is a primary criterion, the candidate must have demonstrated an extraordinary 
ability to stimulate in students, either undergraduate or graduate, a genuine desire for 
scholarly work. Wherever feasible, he or she should have demonstrated the ability to 
direct the research of advanced students. If research or other creative work is a primary 
criterion, the candidate should have shown a continued growth in scholarship which has 
brought national recognition to the person. 

 
 



Page 4 of 8 
 

IV.  Procedure 
 
In schools without department/unit organization the dean shall act in the role of the 
department/unit chair throughout the procedure for promotion consideration. Likewise, when a 
department/unit chair is a candidate for promotion, the procedural functions of the chair shall be 
performed by the dean. 
 
A. Application: A person desiring to seek promotion must file an application by September 1 
with his or her department/unit chair or unit director.  

 
B. Preparation of the Promotion Dossier: Appropriate forms and guidelines for the 
preparation of the promotion dossier shall be available in the Office of the Provost/Executive 
Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs. Preparation of the promotion dossier is the responsibility 
of the person who is making application. The dean and the unit director or the department/unit 
chair shall cooperate with the faculty member especially in providing relevant items which are 
more easily available to the dean or unit director and department/unit chair. Each department/unit 
shall establish timetables for submission of the various parts of the application. 

 
If reference to unpublished manuscripts which have been accepted is included, include 
appropriate letters from editors or publishers in the dossier. 

 
C. Forwarding the Dossier: Every promotion dossier, unless withdrawn by written request to 
the chair or unit director, shall move through the entire promotion review process. The dossier 
shall include the prescribed recommendation forms, which shall be available from the Office of 
the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs. 

 
D. Informing Faculty Member of Progress of Each Step: A faculty member who is being 
considered for promotion shall be notified in writing at each stage of the process of the 
recommendation made at that stage. The department/unit chair or director shall notify the person 
no later than the time the recommendation is sent to the dean or, when appropriate, the Vice 
Chancellor for Research and shall include, for faculty members, in the notice the 
recommendation of the departmental faculty and that of the chair. 

 
Likewise, before or at the time of sending the recommendation forward, the academic dean, the 
Dean of the Graduate School/Vice Chancellor for Research, and the Provost/Executive Vice 
Chancellor for Academic Affairs will each notify the faculty member and all other offices 
involved thus far in the administrative chain of his or her recommendation. The notice will 
include the recommendation of any committee which gives advice on the promotion application. 

 
E. Timetable: On or before September 1--faculty member's application to department/unit 
head; on or before November 21--department's/unit's recommendation to appropriate dean on or 
before December 10-dean's recommendation to the Dean of the Graduate School/Vice 
Chancellor for Research for candidate also being considered for tenure; on or before January 
3--dean's recommendation to the Dean of the Graduate School/Vice Chancellor for Research for 



Page 5 of 8 
 

candidate not being considered for tenure; on or before January 15 --Dean of the Graduate 
School/Vice Chancellor for Research's recommendation to the Provost/Executive Vice 
Chancellor for Academic Affairs; on or before March 20 --Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor 
for Academic Affairs' recommendation to the Chancellor; on or before March 31--Chancellor's 
final action except as provided below to allow time for appeal. 
 
F. Detailed Process at Department/Unit Level: A formal decision by each department/unit, 
either to recommend or not to recommend promotion, must be made no later than November 21. 
The recommendation shall be made on the basis of the candidate's record and in keeping with the 
department's/unit's guidelines for promotion and the University criteria for promotion. If outside 
evaluations are used, all reasonable efforts shall be made to assure the anonymity of the referees 
and the confidentiality of the evaluations. 

 
Prior to making a recommendation, the department/unit chair, in order to have full discussion of 
the promotion application, will call a formal meeting of the faculty of rank equal to or higher 
than the rank to which the candidate aspires in order to discuss the promotion application. Each 
departmental evaluation shall involve a minimum of three faculty, exclusive of the chair, who 
serve at or higher than the rank to which the candidate desires to be promoted. When three are 
not available, the dean, upon the recommendation of the chair and the faculty of rank equal to or 
higher than that being sought by the applicant, shall select additional faculty members from 
closely related departments/units. 

 
The faculty selected must be of rank equal to or above that to which the candidate aspires. Not 
less than one week before a meeting is held to consider a promotion recommendation, each 
faculty member who is to be discussed shall be given written notice that he or she is being 
considered for promotion and shall have an opportunity to bring to the notice of the chair and the 
faculty concerned any additional material which may be helpful in the formulation of a 
recommendation of promotion. 

 
After discussion at the meeting, the faculty, exclusive of the chair and any administrator who 
may later make a formal recommendation in the promotion process, will indicate their decision 
by vote, to be taken by secret ballot. The voting faculty will be immediately informed of the 
results of the secret ballot. Upon giving due consideration to the discussion and to this vote 
(which, however, is not binding upon him or her), the chair will then make his or her 
recommendation to the appropriate administrative officer using the prescribed form. As part of 
the recommendation, the chair will include the record of the vote of the faculty. 

 
G. Advisory Committee to the Dean: A dean of a multiple department/unit school or college 
may use and consult appropriate faculty committees for advice in arriving at a recommendation 
on a promotion application. If an advisory committee is used, the membership shall be selected 
from the full professors in the school or college and should be as representative as possible. The 
recommendation of such a committee, when used, must be recorded and passed along with the 
dean's recommendation. The dean of the school or college makes his or her recommendation to 
the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs; however, the promotion dossier 



Page 6 of 8 
 

goes first to the Dean of the Graduate School/Vice Chancellor for Research for a parallel 
recommendation from that office. 
 
H.          Tenure and Promotion Review Committee: A campus committee shall review all 
regular faculty applications at such time as the applications are sent forward from the Dean of the 
Graduate School/Vice Chancellor for Research to the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for 
Academic Affairs, and its report shall go to the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic 
Affairs. For regular faculty (tenured and tenure track) applications, the composition and scope of 
activities of this committee are specified in Section IV.H. of the Tenure Policy. 
 
I.  Support and Research Faculty Review Committee: A campus committee composed of 
support and research faculty promoted to at least the lecturer or associate-level shall review all 
non-tenure track faculty promotion applications. The Support and Research Faculty Review 
Committee shall assess:  (1) whether it appears that the appropriate procedures have been 
followed; (2) whether, in case of an unfavorable prior recommendation, it appears that 
impermissible grounds led to that unfavorable recommendation; (3) whether it appears that the 
governing criteria and standards have been applied; (4) and, whether any prior recommendation 
appears to be arbitrary or capricious.  The Support and Research Faculty Review 
Committee shall not undertake to make its own judgment on the merits of an application, but it 
shall make an assessment on whether the promotion process has been applied properly, and this 
assessment should be reported to the Provost. The Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for 
Academic Affairs shall have the authority to refer a dossier back to an appropriate level when he 
or she thinks that a procedural violation has occurred. 
  
Each school or college shall be represented with one non-tenure track (Support Faculty or 
Research Faculty) faculty member. The chair of the committee shall be selected at its first 
meeting. Each dean shall recommend to the Provost a Support or Research Faculty member to 
serve on the review committee.  Committee members will serve a three-year term and shall not 
concurrently serve on a Dean's Advisory Committee for Promotion Review.  Individuals from 
the same department as the candidate shall recuse themselves. 
  
J. Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs: If the Provost/Executive Vice 
Chancellor for Academic Affairs elects to act contrary to the recommendation of the 
department/unit chair, dean, or Dean of the Graduate School/Vice Chancellor for Research, prior 
to making his or her own decision, the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor will hold a meeting 
with the department/unit chair and dean concerned unless it is the department/unit chair's or 
dean's personal review. 

 
The recommendation of the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs shall be 
forwarded to the candidate. If the recommendation is a positive one, a recommendation shall also 
be sent to the Chancellor accompanied by recommendations and reports from all entities listed 
prior to this section. In the event of a negative recommendation on the part of the 
Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs, the Executive Vice Chancellor shall 
inform the candidate of his or her recommendation in writing. On request by the candidate, the 
Executive Vice Chancellor shall provide in writing the reasons which contributed to his or her 



Page 7 of 8 
 

recommendation. The faculty member must request these reasons within three working days of 
receipt of the notice of a negative recommendation. The Executive Vice Chancellor must 
respond within three working days of receipt of the faculty member's request. 

 
The faculty member should have an opportunity to discuss the negative recommendation and 
reasons thereof with the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs prior to 
appealing the negative recommendation to the Tenure and Promotion Appeals Committee (see 
V. below). A request for appeal must be made to the chair of the Tenure and Promotion Appeals 
Committee within five working days from receipt of the reasons for the negative 
recommendation from the Executive Vice Chancellor. If an appeal is made, the candidate shall 
have access to the contents of the promotion dossier with the exception of the confidential 
statements from outside reviewers. 

 
If the recommendation of the Executive Vice Chancellor is a negative one and no appeal is taken 
within the allotted time, the recommendation shall be forwarded to the Chancellor. 

 
K. Chancellor: After receiving the recommendations and reports on each candidate from the 
individuals and committees listed above, including the Tenure and Promotion Appeals 
Committee when it is utilized, the Chancellor shall take final action on each promotion 
application by March 31, except when a negative recommendation from the Provost/Executive 
Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs causes a delay. The Chancellor will notify each candidate 
in writing of the final action taken on his or her application for promotion and will supply copies 
of this notice to each reviewing officer. When an application is disapproved, the Chancellor, 
upon request, will provide the candidate with reasons for the disapproval. 
 
If a faculty member who has requested promotion is supported by his or her department/unit 
peers and chair but is not promoted, the faculty member's dossier, at the request of the faculty 
member and with the concurrence of the deans of record and the Provost/Executive Vice 
Chancellor for Academic Affairs, may be held in the Office of the Provost/Executive Vice 
Chancellor for Academic Affairs for one year. In such cases, the faculty member will be 
considered for promotion according to the established time table the next year. The faculty 
member will not be required to request additional external evaluations or to prepare a new 
dossier [in cases where the person's dossier is held], but may add items to the already-submitted 
dossier until January 20 of the next year. If specific conditions are to be met, they need to be 
clearly outlined and made available to the faculty member's department/unit chair, academic 
dean, the Dean of the Graduate School/Vice Chancellor for Research, and the Provost/Executive 
Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs. No action will be required the next year by the faculty 
member's peers, his or her department/unit chair, or the academic dean concerned. 
 
When all action has been completed, the recommendation forms will be filed in the Department 
of Human Resources for a period of five years except in cases, as described above, when dossiers 
are held for one year in the Office of the Provost/Executive Vice Chancellor for Academic 
Affairs. Promotions will be effective with the beginning of the next contract year of each person 
who is promoted in rank. 



Page 8 of 8 
 

 
 
V. Appeal Process 
 
Tenure and Promotion Appeals Committee: The composition, scope of activities, and procedures 
are specified in Item V. of the Tenure Policy. 
 
 
VI. Revisions 
 
Revision to this promotion policy shall be made only after consultation with the Council of 
Academic Administrators and the Senate of the Faculty. 
 


