
Page 1 of 8 

 

The University of Mississippi 

 

Selection of New Faculty Members and Administrators in Academic 

Affairs 

 

Outlined below is the process for the selection of faculty members, department chairs, academic 

deans, directors, associate or assistant directors, associate or assistant deans, the associate vice 

chancellor for academic affairs, and the vice chancellor for academic affairs. In all cases, it 

should be remembered that the provost's letter is considered the only official commitment to the 

candidate.    

In accordance with action taken by the Academic Council and subsequently approved by the 

Chancellor, the following procedures are adopted for academic appointment. 

 

A. Appointment of Faculty Members 

 

1. The department concerned will select from the applicant pool those persons to be 

recommended to the appropriate dean and vice chancellor for an interview. Upon receiving 

approval, the department chair or the chair of the department screening committee will invite the 

candidates to the campus on dates suitable for those who will be involved in the interviewing 

process. All candidates should meet with department members and the dean of the college or 

school and, if possible, with students. Tenure-track faculty members should also be scheduled for 

interviews with the Dean of the Graduate School; those being considered for positions at the rank 

of associate professor or professor should be scheduled for interviews with the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs as well.    

If a prospective faculty member has earned a degree at a non-accredited institution, members of 

the department concerned will carefully examine the candidate's course work and other 

credentials to determine their appropriateness and suitability for the vacant position. 

 

2. After the interview is completed, the department chair or the chair of the search committee 

will ask all persons who had an opportunity to meet and talk with the candidate to offer a 

reaction to the person's qualifications for employment. The Dean of the Graduate School will 

make his/her evaluation known to the appropriate dean. No hiring recommendations should be 

made until this consultation is complete. 

 



Page 2 of 8 

 

3. When the department has decided on a particular candidate, a recommendation of 

employment will be made by the department chair, indicating the evaluation made by department 

members, to the appropriate dean and the Vice Chancellor. If they approve the recommendation, 

the Provost will write the candidate a letter offering the position under specific terms and 

indicating that the recommendation will be forwarded to the Board forthwith. Copies of this 

letter will be sent to the department chair, dean, and the Vice Chancellor. 

Appointments are contingent upon receipt of official transcripts of the candidate's highest degree 

related to his/her position. 

B. Selection and Appointment of Department Chairs, Directors, Associate or Assistant 

Directors, Academic Deans, Associate or Assistant Deans, Provost/Vice Chancellor for 

Academic Affairs, and Associate Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs. 

 

1. Department Chairs.  After receiving notification of an impending vacancy, the Dean shall 

appoint a Search Committee composed of a minimum of three full-time professorial faculty 

members from the department searching for a chair, a student majoring in the field of study, and 

one faculty member from another department selected in consultation with the department 

faculty. Individuals who wish to be considered for the vacancy shall not serve on the Search 

Committee. The Dean shall appoint the Chair of the Search Committee. In all cases, faculty shall 

constitute a majority of the membership of the Search Committee. The Dean shall provide the 

Search Committee with a detailed job description for the position. 

After conducting the search, the Search Committee will present the names of recommended 

candidates to the department. Only tenure track and tenured faculty of professorial rank will then 

vote to accept or reject each candidate. The Search Committee will obtain the input from the 

entire department and will provide to the Dean the results of the vote by groupings--the vote of 

tenured and of nontenured faculty members, for example--for each candidate brought forth.   

The Dean may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Dean must submit his or her 

reasons for doing so to the Search Committee in a meet-and-confer session with the Search 

Committee. If the Dean finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall recommend 

one or more preferences to the Vice Chancellor. 

The Vice Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Vice Chancellor must 

submit his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Search Committee 

and the Dean. If the Vice Chancellor finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall 

recommend one or more preferences to the Chancellor.   

The Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Chancellor must submit his 

or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Vice Chancellor, the Dean, and 

the Search Committee. If all of the Committee's recommendations are rejected at any level, the 

Dean may request the Search Committee to submit additional names, or he or she may form a 

new Search Committee. 

 



Page 3 of 8 

 

2. Directors.* Upon receiving notification of an impending vacancy, the appropriate Supervisor 

shall begin to top a Search Committee. The Search Committee, appointed by the Supervisor, 

shall consist of a minimum of three full-time faculty and/or professional staff members from the 

bureau or institute. For those bureaus or institutes where there are fewer than three full-time 

faculty and/or professional staff members, the Supervisor, in consultation with the bureau or 

institute faculty and/or professional staff members, shall appoint one or more full-time faculty 

and/or professional staff members from outside the bureau or institute. In all cases, the Senate of 

the Faculty shall appoint one faculty member to the Search Committee. The Supervisor shall 

appoint the chair of the Search Committee. In all cases, faculty and/or professional staff 

members shall constitute a majority of the membership of the Search Committee. The Supervisor 

shall provide the Search Committee with a detailed job description for the position. Individuals 

who wish to be considered for the vacancy shall not serve on the Search Committee. (This 

selection policy shall not apply to the Mississippi Judicial College.) 

After screening potential candidates and consulting with all members of the program, the Search 

Committee shall submit to the Supervisor the names of candidates whom it considers qualified 

for the position. 

The Supervisor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Supervisor must provide his 

or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Search Committee. If the 

Supervisor finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall recommend one or more 

preferences to the Vice Chancellor. (The Supervisor and the Vice Chancellor may, in some 

instances, be one and the same person.) 

The Vice Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Vice Chancellor must 

provide his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Supervisor and the 

Search Committee. If the Vice Chancellor finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she 

shall recommend one or more preferences to the Chancellor.   

The Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Chancellor must provide 

his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Vice Chancellor, the 

Supervisor, and the Search Committee. If all of the Search Committee's recommendations are 

rejected at any level, the Supervisor may request the Search Committee to submit additional 

names, or may form a new Search Committee. 

 

* Directors shall be defined as those persons holding the title 'Director' and having supervisory 

authority over a professional staff. 

 

3. Associate or Assistant Directors.* Upon receiving notification of an impending vacancy, the 

Director shall begin to develop a Search Committee. The Search Committee, appointed by the 

Director, shall consist of a minimum of three full-time faculty and/or professional staff members 

from the bureau or institute. In those bureaus or institutes where there are fewer than three 



Page 4 of 8 

 

full-time faculty and/or professional staff members, the director, in consultation with the bureau 

or institute faculty and/or professional staff members, shall appoint one or more faculty and/or 

professional staff members from outside the bureau or institute. In all cases, the Senate of the 

Faculty shall appoint one faculty member to the Search Committee. The Director shall appoint 

the chair of the Search Committee. In all cases, faculty and/or professional staff members shall 

constitute a majority of the membership of the Search Committee. The Director shall provide the 

Search Committee with a detailed job description for the position. Individuals who wish to be 

considered for the vacancy shall not serve on the Search Committee. 

After screening potential candidates and consulting with all members of the program, the Search 

Committee shall submit to the Director the names of candidates whom it considers qualified for 

the position. 

 

The Director may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Director must provide his or 

her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Search Committee. If the Director 

finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall recommend one or more preferences to 

the Vice Chancellor, or to the Academic Dean, if the Director reports to an Academic Dean. 

 

The Dean, if the Director reports to a Dean, may reject any or all names submitted. However, the 

Dean must provide his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Director 

and the Search Committee. If the Dean finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall 

recommend one or more preferences to the Vice Chancellor. 

 

The Vice Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Vice Chancellor must 

provide his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Dean (if he or she 

has authority), the Director, and the Search Committee. If the Vice Chancellor finds one or more 

nominations acceptable he or she shall recommend one or more preferences to the Chancellor. 

 

The Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Chancellor must provide 

his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Vice Chancellor, the Dean 

(if he or she has authority), the Director, and the Search Committee. If all of the Committee's 

recommendations are rejected at any level, the Director may request the Committee to submit 

additional names, or may form a new Search Committee. 

 

* Limited to persons budgeted more than 50 percent in the office. 

 



Page 5 of 8 

 

4. Academic Deans. Upon receiving notification of an impending vacancy, the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs shall begin to develop a Search Committee. The Search 

Committee, appointed by the Vice Chancellor, shall be made up of representative faculty 

members from the college or school, a representative from the Associated Student Body, a 

representative from the Graduate Student Council (in the case of the Law School, the Law 

Students Governing Association will appoint one representative), a faculty member appointed by 

the Senate of the Faculty, and faculty members from related disciplines outside the college or 

school. The student representatives must be majors in the college or school. Members of the 

Search Committee from outside the college or school must always constitute a minority of the 

Search Committee membership. The Vice Chancellor shall appoint the chair of the Search 

Committee. In all cases, faculty shall constitute a majority of the membership of the Search 

Committee. The Vice Chancellor shall provide the Search Committee with a detailed job 

description for the position. Individuals who wish to be considered for the vacancy shall not 

serve on the Search Committee. 

 

After screening potential candidates and consulting with faculty members of the appropriate 

college or school, according to the procedures established by the college or school, the Search 

Committee shall submit to the Vice Chancellor the names of one or more candidates whom it 

thinks best suited for the position. 

 

The Vice Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Vice Chancellor must 

provide his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Search Committee. 

If the Vice Chancellor finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall recommend one 

or more preferences to the Chancellor. 

 

The Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Chancellor must provide 

his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Vice Chancellor and the 

Search Committee. If all of the Search Committee's recommendations are rejected at any level, 

the Vice Chancellor may request that the Search Committee submit additional names, or may 

form a new Search Committee. 

 

The procedure employed in filling the position of Dean of the Libraries shall be consistent with 

that employed in selecting Academic Deans. 

 

5. Associate or Assistant Deans.* Upon receiving notification of an impending vacancy, the 

Dean shall begin to develop a Search Committee. The Search Committee, appointed by the 



Page 6 of 8 

 

Dean, shall consist of representative faculty members from the college or school, an 

undergraduate student from the college or school, a graduate student from the college or school, 

and one or more faculty members from a related discipline outside the college or school. 

Members of the Search Committee from outside the college or school must always constitute a 

minority of the membership of the Search Committee. The Dean shall appoint the chair of the 

Search Committee.  In all cases, faculty shall constitute a majority of the membership of the 

Search Committee. The Dean shall provide the Search Committee with a detailed job description 

for the position. Individuals who wish to be considered for the vacancy shall not serve on the 

Search Committee. 

 

After screening potential candidates and consulting with the faculty members in the college or 

school, according to the procedures established by the college or school, the Search Committee 

shall submit to the dean the names of one or more candidates whom it thinks best suited for the 

position. 

 

The Dean may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Dean must provide his or her 

reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Search Committee. If the Dean finds 

one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall recommend one or more preferences to the 

Vice Chancellor. 

 

The Vice Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Vice Chancellor must 

provide his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Dean and the 

Search Committee. If the Vice Chancellor finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she 

shall recommend one or more preferences to the Chancellor.   

 

The Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Chancellor must provide 

his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Vice Chancellor, the Dean, 

and the Search Committee. If all of the Search Committee's recommendations are rejected at any 

level, the Dean may request the Search Committee to submit additional names, or may form a 

new Search Committee. 

 

The procedure employed in filling the positions of Associate and Assistant Director of the 

Library shall be consistent with that employed in selecting Associate and Assistant Deans. 

 

* Limited to persons budgeted more than 50 percent in the office. 



Page 7 of 8 

 

 

6. Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs. Upon receiving notice of an impending 

vacancy, the Chancellor shall begin to develop a Search Committee. The Search Committee, 

appointed by the Chancellor, shall have at least one faculty representative from the college, the 

library, and each school on campus. The Associated Student Body, the Graduate Student 

Council, the Law Students Governing Association, and the Senate of the Faculty shall each 

appoint one representative to the Search Committee. The Chancellor may appoint additional 

members of the Search Committee, but faculty must always constitute a majority of the 

membership of the Search Committee. The Chancellor shall appoint the chair of the Search 

Committee. In all cases, faculty shall constitute a majority of the membership of the Search 

Committee. The Chancellor shall provide the Search Committee with a detailed job description 

for the position. Individuals who wish to be considered for the vacancy shall not serve on the 

Search Committee. 

 

After screening potential candidates and consulting with members of the faculty, the Search 

Committee shall submit to the Chancellor the names of one or more candidates whom it thinks 

best suited for the position. 

 

The Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Chancellor must provide 

his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Search Committee.   

 

If the Chancellor rejects all of the Search Committee's recommendations, he or she may request 

the Search Committee to submit additional names, or may form a new Search Committee. 

 

7. Associate Provost/Associate Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs.  After having informed 

the faculty of an impending vacancy, the Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs shall 

appoint a Search Committee. Each school, the college, and the library shall have at least one 

faculty representative on the Search Committee. The Associated Student Body, the Graduate 

Student Council, the Law Students Governing Association, and the Senate of the Faculty shall 

each appoint one representative to the Search Committee. The Provost/Vice Chancellor for 

Academic Affairs may also appoint additional members of the committee. However, faculty 

must always constitute a majority of the membership of the Search Committee. The Provost/Vice 

Chancellor shall appoint the chair of the Search Committee. In all cases, faculty shall constitute a 

majority of the membership of the Search Committee. The Provost/Vice Chancellor shall provide 

the Search Committee with detailed job description for the position. Individuals who wish to be 

considered for the vacancy shall not serve on the Search Committee.   



Page 8 of 8 

 

 

After screening potential candidates and consulting with members of the faculty, the Search 

Committee shall submit to the Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs the names of one 

or more candidates whom it thinks best suited for the position. 

 

The Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs may reject any or all names submitted.  

However, the Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs must provide his or her reasons for 

doing so in a meet and-confer session with the Search Committee.  If the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs finds one or more nominations acceptable, he or she shall 

recommend one or more preferences to the Chancellor.   

 

The Chancellor may reject any or all names submitted. However, the Chancellor must provide 

his or her reasons for doing so in a meet-and-confer session with the Vice Chancellor and the 

Search Committee. If all of the Search Committee's recommendations are rejected at any level, 

the Provost/Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs may request the Search Committee to submit 

additional names, or may form a new Search Committee. 

 

C. No new academic administrative position may be created without the express approval 

of the University Planning Council. 

 


