
The University of Mississippi 

Emeritus Status 

Emeritus/emerita status is an honorary title awarded for distinguished service to the university over an extended 

period of time.  University employees are eligible for emeritus status in connection with their rank as specified 

below:   

1. Full-time faculty members in good standing and not being investigated or considered for  disciplinary action 

who elect to retire after 10 years of faculty service with the university and who meet the criteria for retirement 

under the Public Employees' Retirement System of Mississippi or the Optional Retirement Plan. 

2. Administrative personnel in good standing and not being investigated or considered for disciplinary action who 

elect to retire after 10 consecutive years of service in a department head (or equivalent) or higher capacity with 

the university and who meet the criteria for retirement under the Public Employees' Retirement System of 

Mississippi or the Optional Retirement Plan.  

Faculty members and administrative personnel who meet the criteria but do not have 10 consecutive years of 

service may be recommended by the Dean or the Vice Chancellor of the division.  

Faculty members and administrative personnel should request emeritus status through their department chair or 

unit administrator at the time of retirement. It is the responsibility of the department chair or unit administrator to 

indicate on the appropriate personnel forms (Form 3/Separation Form) the request for emeritus status. Requests 

for the awarding of emeritus status will be coordinated by the Director of Human Resources.  The form will be 

routed as appropriate, with approvals at various stages. The respective Vice Chancellor and Provost or the 

Chancellor, as applicable, will determine final approval of the conferring of the title after discussion with the unit 

administrator and Dean/VC, after reviewing the employee’s personnel records including any investigations or 

disciplinary actions, and after considering any outstanding obligations (e.g., parking fines, library fines).   

Once awarded, the emeritus designation continues in perpetuity unless the recipient either requests to have their 

emeritus status rescinded or violates the intent and spirit of the faculty emeritus status by engaging in egregious 

conduct that would diminish the reputation of the University of Mississippi.  The emeritus status may be revoked 

at the discretion of the Provost in consideration with the stipulations outlined above.  

Privileges accorded to persons with emeritus status include the following:  

1. Emeritus title 
2. Inclusion of names in the university directory and in applicable lists of faculty/staff, if  

they are actively re-employed as retirees.  

3. Eligibility for full library and technology privileges.  
4. Eligibility for office space when available.  

Additional retirement benefits including discounts on some services and events and eligibility to take classes on 

campus can be found on the Human Resources website.  

September 2019 

  

Page 1 of 1  


