
The University of Mississippi 

 

Page 1 of 2 
 

Probationary Period 

Summary/Purpose: All non-faculty, non-contractual employees must complete an initial 

probationary period not to exceed six months unless an exception is granted by the Director of 

Human Resources (or designee) to extend the probation period beyond six months. The 

employee must successfully serve in the position for a minimum of three months before the 

supervisor can recommend continuation of employment under the “regular” (non-probationary) 

status. Guidelines are given for the supervisor to utilize during this period of time along with 

procedures for processing the probationary staff review. This includes the time frame for the 

review and when the probation period can be continued. 

All non-faculty, non-contractual employees must complete a probationary period for an initial 

period not to exceed six months, unless an exception is granted by the Director of Human 

Resources (or designee) to extend the probation period beyond six months. This initial period of 

each employee's service shall be utilized by the supervisor for observing closely the employee's 

work, for counseling the employee on area of needed improvement, and considering continued 

employment if the work performance meets the required work standards.  

Process: 

Ninety days after the employee’s start date, the online Probationary Staff Review form is made 

available to the supervisor.  The supervisor will receive an email with instructions to access the 

online form on the University’s site, connectU, at connectu.olemiss.edu, within the “Performance 

& Engagement” tile.  

The probationary review consists of a brief review of the employee’s performance on general job 

group-related objectives.  The supervisor is also encouraged to include an overall comment.   

At this time the supervisor may make a decision regarding the staff member’s continued 

employment with the University.  The form will include a published due date seven (7) days 

prior to the sixth month of employment, with additional steps and deadlines programmed to 

ensure the process, including all acknowledgements and approvals, is completed by the sixth 

month of employment.  Failure to complete and submit the review by the sixth month of 

employment will result in automatic continued employment with an updated status of “regular” 

(non-probationary). 

If the supervisor determines that additional time is required to assess the employee’s skills, 

abilities, interest and/or performance, the supervisor may request to extend the probationary 

period for an additional period not to exceed a total of twelve months of employment.  The 

request must be communicated to a Human Resources manager and processed on the initial 

Probationary Review Form by the employee’s sixth month of employment (six month 

anniversary date).   If approved, an additional form, Extended Probationary Review, will be 

launched for the next Probationary Review determination. The supervisor will receive an email 

with instructions to access the online form on the University’s site, connectU, at 

connectu.olemiss.edu (https://connectu.olemiss.edu/), within the “Performance & Engagement” 

tile. The additional requested time for the probationary review does not guarantee continued 

employment for the full requested amount of time.  The extension must be requested and granted 

through the initial Probationary Review form. 

https://connectu.olemiss.edu/


The University of Mississippi 

 

Page 2 of 2 
 

It is the supervisor’s responsibility to submit the probationary review in a timely manner. 

The form is submitted online through the connectU program.  After the supervisor submits the 

form, the employee may acknowledge the form and forwards the electronic form for the next 

signature, the supervisor’s manager (next level manager). Once received, a Human Resources 

representative will acknowledge receipt and the form will be completed.  A copy of the form is 

retained in each person’s “Completed” folder within the Performance module, accessed through 

the drop down menu. 

Failure to complete and submit the review by the sixth month of employment will result in 

continued employment with an updated status of “regular” (non-probationary). 

Required licensure/certification: 

Recommendation for continued employment in a “regular” status may not be made until the 

licensure/certification requirement as defined in the position description is satisfied. 

Termination of Employment: 

Probationary employees may be terminated at any time during the probationary period without a 

right of appeal. Department heads should ensure, however, that the reason(s) for the termination 

is documented. The documentation needed does not rise to the same level as that for termination 

of a regular employee but should outline how the employee failed to meet work standards. 

Transferred Employment: 

Anyone hired into a regular (non-temporary) support staff or professional/administrative staff 

position will be required to complete six months of employment before being allowed to apply 

for other jobs on campus.  

The only exceptions include:  

An employee in the probationary period may apply for a promotional opportunity that is in the 

best interest of the employee and the University.  While in the probationary period, a non-exempt 

employee may not apply for another similar non-exempt position outside of the department.  

An employee may transfer within his/her current department. If an employee transfers to another 

position during the probationary period, the probationary period will be extended so that the 

person will serve a minimum of three months in a probationary status in the new position before 

the supervisor can recommend continuation of employment in a “regular” status. 

Transferred Employment after Successfully Completing a Probationary Period with the 

University: 

An additional probationary period is not required of an employee who already successfully 

completed an initial probationary period with the University upon promotion to a new position. 

If the employee is unable to perform satisfactorily in the new position and has put forth a good- 

faith effort, the University will make every possible effort to attempt to effect a change to a 

position similar to the one held by the employee. 


