
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Custodians in Hazardous Locations 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Custodians in Hazardous Locations Policy details the prohibition from 
having untrained custodial staff service locations that use or store hazardous materials, animals 
or hazardous machinery. 
 

Custodians in Hazardous Locations 

Custodial Services are responsible for the cleanliness of the University facilities, including 
Offices, Classrooms, Meeting Rooms, Hallways and Restrooms. Other areas of the University 
usually require advanced technical training before personnel can fully understand and adequately 
protect themselves from the hazards within these areas. Since custodial staff are neither trained 
nor assigned to work in these areas, they will not provide unsupervised services in these areas. 
Laboratory personnel will be required to take care of their own housekeeping.  

Specifically, custodians will provide no routine cleaning services within:  

 Laboratories,  
 Shops, Storage Rooms,  
 Areas designated by the Animal Care and Use Committee, 
 Other areas designated by the Superintendent of Custodial Services, Facilities 

Maintenance, the Fire Inspector, or the Research and Environmental Compliance Officer. 

The following policy will protect the custodial staff while allowing for limited services to 
hazardous locations: 

1. No trash of any kind will be removed from inside any hazardous areas, including research 
laboratories, by custodial staff. If you wish to have your trash taken away, you must 
collect it from inside your lab and place it in a designated waste container just inside your 
lab door, or in a designated area outside your lab. Custodial Staff will specify collection 
areas for each lab or hazardous location. 

2. The waste cans to be used will be supplied. Waste cans containing trash from research 
labs may be required to use specific trash liners, of a distinguishing color, supplied by the 
custodial staff. 

3. No glass bottles, i.e., solvent or empty chemical bottles, or sharps are to be placed in this 
trash. Broken glass must be placed in standard box containers. When these boxes are full, 
they must be sealed with tape and placed in the dumpster behind the building by the lab 
staff. See Disposal of Laboratory Glassware for specific instructions. Unbroken empty 
bottles are to be placed in the dumpster by lab staff. The custodians will not handle empty 
bottles. 

4. Sharps are to be collected in special containers designed for this purpose. Contact 
Laboratory Services (5433) for specifications and guidelines. Full containers of Sharps 
will be collected by Laboratory Services. 

5. When custodial staff need access to a hazardous area for non-emergency cleaning (end of 
the semester, etc.) the Area Supervisor will :  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

o Provide continuous, Authorized Supervision while custodial personnel are in the 
area,  

o assure that all hazardous materials are capped, sealed and stored,  
o have all hazardous equipment powered down, and, 
o Cease all hazardous operations. 

6. Established procedures for the disposal of Hazardous Materials (including waste solvents, 
solid chemicals, biohazards, radioactive materials, etc.) are not affected by this policy.  

 


