
The University of Mississippi 
 

Tutoring Policy for Graduate Assistants 
 
 No one who is teaching a section of a course may also accept payment for tutoring a 
student in that section.  This prohibits a Graduate Assistant from accepting positions as a tutor 
for that section either in other University units (such as the Athletic Department) or in 
non-University agencies; it also prohibits a Graduate Assistant from accepting payment for 
tutoring a student in his or her course or section independently (i.e., as a private arrangement 
between the student and the Graduate Assistant). 
 
 No one who works for a faculty member as a Graduate Assistant with responsibilities for 
a particular course or section of a course (for example, as a test grader) may accept payment for 
tutoring a student who is in that faculty member's course or section of a course. 
 
 No one who is teaching a section of a course in which the same departmental examination 
is given to multiple sections, may accept payment for tutoring a student in any section of that 
course. 
 
 Graduate Assistants who work as laboratory assistants may not accept payment for 
tutoring a student who is in any of the laboratory sections for that course. 
 
 Individual departments may impose more stringent restrictions on their Graduate 
Assistants' tutoring activities, so long as those restrictions apply uniformly to all Graduate 
Assistants in the department and do not have the effect of discriminating against any individual 
or group of individuals. 
 
 Graduate Assistants are reminded that they must avoid any type of tutoring activity (for 
additional pay) that might lead to real or implied conflicts of interest or that might compromise 
the academic integrity of the University. 
 
 Tutors must not discuss a student's work with a Graduate Assistant who is teaching that 
student, if the results of that discussion might, intentionally or unintentionally, seem to pressure 
the Graduate Assistant to give the student an unfair advantage or to assign a particular grade. 
 
 Tutors must not prepare students' assignments for them. 
 
 Tutors must not use their access to information about assignments or examinations within 
the department to give the students they are tutoring an unfair advantage over other students. 
 
 Graduate Assistants should not recommend to their own students that they seek tutorial 
assistance from other Graduate Assistants, but might instead recommend that they seek 
assistance from the Academic Support Center. 
 


