
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Cost Transfers on Sponsored Projects 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Each administrative head has the responsibility to determine the 
appropriate account when expending funds and to ensure that the budgets under his/her 
jurisdiction are not over-obligated or over-expended.  While it is preferable to charge costs to the 
correct accounts when they are incurred, in certain situations the University allows cost transfers. 
To be allowable, cost transfers must be timely, fully documented, conform to university and 
sponsor allowability standards, and have appropriate authorizing signatures.  Generally, expense 
transfers are allowed for costs incurred within ninety-days of the request.  Additional 
consideration will be given to both fiscal year and sponsored award termination dates. 
 
It is critical that accounts be reviewed on a regular (e.g., monthly) basis to ensure that all 
expenditures charged, both personnel and other than personnel, are correct and appropriate.  It is 
the responsibility of the signatory officer to authorize transactions and review the account 
activity.  Whenever an error is discovered, it must be corrected as quickly as possible.  
 
A transfer may be denied in certain situations such as when the expense and request are made in 
different fiscal years or if there is inadequate justification for the transfer.  Every effort should be 
made to process expense transfers (including personnel costs) prior to the close of the fiscal year 
in which the original expense was incurred.  Frequent, late, and inadequately documented and 
explained transfers, especially those which involve sponsored projects with overruns or 
unexpended balances, raise serious questions about the propriety of the transfers and may result 
in expenditure disallowances and/or subsequent reduction in funding.  
  
Each cost transfer must be clearly explained with supporting documentation.  The written 
explanation and supporting documentation should clearly address all of the following:  

 A description of the expense(s) being transferred, including why and when the original 
charge(s) occurred 

 Why the receiving account was not originally charged 
 Why it is appropriate to charge the receiving account 

 
Transfers after the ninety-day period are only allowed in extraordinary situations and only upon 
approval by the Office of Accounting.  In all cases, a complete explanation must be included to 
justify why the transfer is necessary and why the expense was not originally charged to the 
correct account.   
 
Cost Transfers on Sponsored Projects 
 
The United States Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Uniform Guidance: Cost 
Principles, Audit and Administrative Requirements for Federal Awards Section 200.413 
specifies that "direct costs are those costs that can be identified specifically with a particular final 
cost objective, such as a Federal award…or that can be directly assigned to such activities 
relatively easily with a high degree of accuracy."  
 
Awards issued prior to December 26, 2014 should follow OMB Circular A‐21: Cost Principles 
for Educational Institutions.   



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

Typically, cost transfers are appropriate when they are allowable direct costs of the sponsored 
project, and their purpose is to:  
 

 Correct errors in processing the original charges 

 Move costs between accounts for closely related work (as defined by the project scope) 
that is supported by more than one funding source 

 To transfer pre-award costs in accordance with the provisions of OMB Uniform 
Guidance: Cost Principles, Audit and Administrative Requirements for Federal Awards 
Section 200.458.  

Inappropriate circumstances for cost transfers include, but are not limited to, the following:  
 

 When the transfer is solely for the purpose of utilizing unexpended funds of a sponsored 
award 

 When the transfer is for the purpose of avoiding a cost overrun by charging another, 
unrelated sponsored award 

 When the transfer circumvents pre- and/or post-award restrictions 

 


