
The University of Mississippi 

 

 1of3 

General Degree Requirements 
 

The following requirements are established by the University for all undergraduate degrees. The student 

also must complete additional requirements for each specific degree; these are established by each college 

and school within the University and are described elsewhere in this catalog. 

 

University Core Curriculum: The core curriculum is a set of 30 hours of course work taken by students. 

The core includes the following courses required for all entering freshmen students: 6 hours of English 

composition, 3 hours of college algebra or quantitative reasoning or statistics (taken from a department of 

mathematics) or a more advanced mathematics course; 6 hours of natural science; 9 hours of humanities 

and fine arts, and 6 hours of social or behavioral science courses.   

 
* Honors students may satisfy English composition requirements by taking HON 101 and 102. 

 

The purpose of the core curriculum, along with course work in the major, electives, and co-curricular 

learning experiences, is to provide a general education experience for students to enable them to  

1. Study the principal domains of knowledge and their methods of inquiry; 

2. Integrate knowledge from diverse disciplines; 

3. Analyze, synthesize, and evaluate complex and challenging material that stimulates intellectual 

curiosity, reflection, and capacity for lifelong learning; 

4. Communicate qualitative, quantitative, and technological concepts by effective written, oral, 

numerical, and graphical means; 

5. Work individually and collaboratively on projects that require the application of knowledge and 

skill; 

6. Understand a variety of world cultures as well as the richness and complexity of American society; 

and  

7. Realize that knowledge and ability carry with them a responsibility for their constructive and 

ethical use in society. 

 

Intended General Education Student Learning Outcomes: Upon completing the core curriculum, along 

with certain courses within the program/major and co-curricular learning experiences, University of 

Mississippi baccalaureate-seeking students should demonstrate the following general education 

competencies:  

 Critical thinking; 

 Ethical reasoning; 

 Mathematical reasoning; 

 Oral communication; 

 Written communication. 

 

Declaring a Major: When entering the university, a student may declare an intended degree program 

(major) or may declare to be Undecided.  Students who have completed at least 12 hours at the university 

and who wish to declare a major or switch majors must have at least a 2.0 overall GPA (resident GPA) on 

these hours and must have at least a 2.0 GPA on all work attempted at other institutions.  Individual degree 

programs and schools may impose a higher entering resident GPA requirement or selection criteria and 

academic deans may approve exceptions to the above GPA requirement. Students must also declare a 

major upon completion of 45 credit hours. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

 

 2of3 

Minimum Credit Hours:  All baccalaureate degree programs require at least 120 semester hours with 

passing grades. Students who take more than the required number of hours will designate on a Degree 

Application Form which courses are to be applied towards the degree. 

 

Minimum Grade Point Average:  For the award of a bachelor’s degree from any school or college of the 

University of Mississippi, a student must earn a GPA of at least 2.00 on all course work submitted in 

fulfillment of the course requirements for the degree. In addition, the student must earn a minimum GPA 

of 2.00 on all course work attempted at The University of Mississippi. Finally, the student must have a 

minimum 2.00 GPA on all college work attempted at any institution of higher learning. 

 

There may be additional grade requirements for the College of Liberal Arts or the professional schools. It 

is the student’s responsibility to check on the requirements applicable to the specific degree for which he 

or she is a candidate. 

 

Academic Residency Requirements: All courses taken at the University of Mississippi Oxford campus, 

at any of the University’s resident centers in Tupelo, Jackson, Southaven, or other locations in Mississippi, 

through the University’s Department of Independent Study by a University of Mississippi student, or 

through approved study abroad and exchange programs where the student is registered in University of 

Mississippi courses, are considered to be courses taken in residence. 

 

At least 25 percent of the semester credit hours required for an undergraduate degree (e.g., 30 hours for a 

120 hour degree) must be taken in residence. At least 30 semester hours of credit must be taken in 

residence while enrolled in the school or college recommending the degree. Both hours taken before and 

after a student declares a major in a particular school or college may be used to satisfy the 30-hour 

residence requirement.  
 

Last 21 Hour Residency Requirement: Students must acquire at least 15 of their last 21 credit hours in 

residence at the University. That is, no more than 6 of the last 21 hours may be transfer credit. A student 

may not apply courses taken from the University’s Independent Study department or via the University’s 

study abroad or exchange programs towards this 15 hour requirement unless the student has obtained 

written approval from the student’s academic department and dean before enrolling in the course. 

 

Degree Application: Each senior must file a degree application, listing courses and credit hours to be 

applied towards the degree, with his or her academic dean. Deadlines for submitting this application are set 

by the college and schools. 

 

Diploma Application: A candidate for graduation must submit an application for a diploma to the 

registrar on or before the deadline for the application for diploma, as stated in the Academic Calendar. 

Application is made for graduation at a specified time; if a student fails to graduate at that time, he or she 

must submit another application to be considered for graduation at a later date. 

 

Commencement: Attendance at commencement exercises is required for those students who graduate at 

the end of spring or summer semesters. In case of hardship, a student may petition his or her academic 

dean to be excused. With the recommendation of the dean and the approval of the chancellor, the degree 

can be awarded in absentia. Students who graduate at mid-year are invited to participate in the spring 

commencement, but are not required to attend. 

 

Dual Major and Second Bachelor’s Degree: A student may receive a single bachelor’s degree with more 



The University of Mississippi 

 

 3of3 

than one major.  For example, a student may receive a B.A. degree in the College of Liberal Arts with a 

double major. Regardless of whether the requirements for the two majors are completed simultaneously or 

in succession, the university is authorized to award a single degree and diploma in such cases.   

 

A student may receive a second bachelor’s degree of a different degree type (e.g., the first degree being a 

B.A. and the second being a B.S.) by completing at least 30 additional semester hours in residence from 

the university with a minimum 2.00 GPA for these additional hours.  All requirements for the second 

degree must be completed, including courses required for the major and general education courses that 

may be different from those for the first degree program.  As an example, if the first degree requires 124 

hours, a student must complete an additional 30 hours (154 hours total and including all specific course 

requirements for both programs) to be awarded a second, different bachelor’s degree.  If the two degrees 

are awarded by the same school/college then there may be additional rules imposed by that 

school/college. Two diplomas are awarded in this case, whether or not the requirements for the degrees are 

met simultaneously or in succession.   

 

If a student has received the first degree from another institution, to receive a second bachelor’s degree 

from the University of Mississippi he or she must satisfy the specific courses for the major with at least 30 

hours in residence enrollment and with a minimum 2.00 GPA on work attempted at the university.  Note 

that the 30 hours of University of Mississippi resident work is a minimum and that at least 25 percent of 

the credit hours required for the degree must be completed from the University of Mississippi. 

 

Second Bachelor Degree: The University of Mississippi may confer a second bachelor’s degree upon 

either its graduates or those of another institution when a student has completed the specific course 

requirements for the second degree as defined by the University of Mississippi.  In addition to the credits 

used for the first degree, the candidate for the second bachelor’s degree must complete at least 30 semester 

hours in residence from the school or college recommending the degree, with a minimum 2.00 GPA for 

those courses. 

 

Curriculum Changes: Whenever possible, the University allows a student to obtain a degree by 

completing the curriculum course requirements in the catalog in effect at the time of the first, or any 

subsequent, registration at The University of Mississippi or at an accredited junior, community, or senior  

college, provided the work is completed within six years of the publication date of the catalog used. In the 

case of minor changes to a specified curriculum, a school or college may require substitute courses or 

activities to meet the spirit of the requirements. However, in the case of substantial changes to the 

curriculum, the University reserves the right to require currently enrolled students to follow a new 

curriculum. 
 

 


