
 1 

The University of Mississippi 
 

 
 

Motor Vehicle Policy 
And Fleet Management 

Guide 
 
 

 

Contents 
 

Foreword        4 
 

General 4 
Statement of Purpose 
Application 
Enforcement/Consequences 

 

Management 4 
General 
Safe and Courteous Operation 
Approval to Purchase New Vehicles 

 

IHL Monthly Vehicle Summary Report 5 
 

Risk Management 6 
Liability Coverage 
Accidents and Accident Reporting 
Injured Employee 
Injured Passenger (non-employee) 
Emergency Equipment 

 

Vehicle Use Policy 7 
Official Use Policy 
Personal Use 
Vehicle Assignment 
Commuting Approval 



 2 

Commentary 
Operating a University Vehicle 
Drivers 
Private Vehicles  
Vans (15-Passenger)  
Animals 
Non-Official Decals 
Firearms 
Seat Belts  
Personal Property 

 

Rental of Vehicles        12 
Insurance 
Buses 

 

Vehicle Records 13 
Vehicle Numbers 
Vehicle Titles 
Vehicle Tags 
Marking of Vehicles 
Vehicle Colors 

 

Maintenance 14 
Care of Vehicles  
Annual Safety Inspection 
Appearance and Operation 
Vehicle Warranty Tracking 
Routine Washing 
Fuel Purchases 
Fuel Credit Cards 
Alternative Fuels 

 

Classes of License and Endorsements 16 
Class R 
Class A 
Class B 
Class C 
Class D 
Endorsements and Restrictions 



 3 

Replacement Goals 16 
 

Disposal Rules and Regulation                                    16 
Procedures for Selling/Transferring 
Methods 
Trades 
Transfers 
Sale – Sealed Bid 
Auctions 

 

Appendices/Forms       
1. Monthly Vehicle Inspection Checklist 19 
2. Driver’s Pre-Trip Inspection Checklist 20 
3. Vehicle Use Agreement (Mandatory)      21 
4. Motor Vehicle Incident Reporting Instructions for Drivers 23 
5. Factors to Consider during an Incident Review 24 
6. Driver Records Request (Mandatory)      25 
7. IHL Van Safety Recommendations      26 
8. Consideration When Hiring Bus Companies                                             26 



4 
 

Foreword 

 
This guide contains the basic elements concerning the safe and legal use of all 
vehicles operated for the benefit of the University of Mississippi, whether they are 
university vehicles, rented, or private vehicles. The use of this guide will facilitate 
continuity across the IHL System with regard to elements addressed while 
allowing flexibility among member institutions as to how each element is 
addressed. The following elements are reflective of various state and federal 
laws and regulations, insurance industry standards, and safety standards. The 
following practices are designed to apply to motor vehicles that are licensed to 
operate on public roadways and the drivers of such vehicles, in compliance with 
IHL Board Policy 711.06. 

 

 
 

General 
 

Statement of Purpose: These policies and/or procedures exist to promote the 
safe, legal, and responsible use of university vehicles owned or operated for the 
benefit of the University of Mississippi. The protection of life, property, and the 
good stewardship of public resources is at stake. 

 
Application: These practices apply to any and all vehicles used for the benefit of 
the University that are licensed for travel on public roads. 

 
Enforcement/Consequences: University employees and student drivers are 
warned that failure to follow this policy will subject the person violating this 
policy to disciplinary action, including possible dismissal from the University. 

 

 
 

Management 
 

General: The university administration has endorsed this overall vehicle 
operations and fleet management policy/program, recognizing that first and 
foremost is the safety of employees, students, and the public. The benefits of this 
vehicle policy include wise stewardship of public resources, a good public image, 
conservation of budget, and responsibility to citizens. With consideration given to 
how vehicles are allotted, assigned, or managed, all levels of university 
administration (faculty and staff) should be familiar with this master policy and 
fleet management program and are to be held accountable for the program’s 
development, management, and implementation. 

 
All university vehicles belong to the institution as a whole and are considered a 
single fleet of vehicles. While most vehicles are managed as individual or 
departmental vehicles, they are still part of the University’s fleet and will be 
treated as such under this policy. Having a university vehicle to operate is a 



5 
 

privilege, not a right.  Each department with an assigned university vehicle will 
designate a point of contact to work with Procurement Services on enforcement 
and compliance with the Motor Vehicle Policy and Fleet Management Guide.  
This person may be the department head or his/her designee. 

 
Safe and Courteous Operation: University vehicles, and the manner in which 
they are operated, affect the University’s image. Poor driving manners and 
inappropriate use reflect on the university and all its employees. Operators must 
exercise the highest degree of prudence and courtesy. Unsafe or aggressive 
driving, such as those acts listed below, can create negative public 
impressions and result in bodily injury, death, or property damage. 
 
(1) Speeding 
(2) Improper passing 
(3) Failure to yield right-of-way 
(4) Tailgating 
(5) Failure to adjust to road or weather conditions 
(6) Failure to use vehicle’s safety devices such as lights, wipers, turn signals, etc. 
(7) Improper gesturing, language, or use of horn or lights 
(8) Other violations of law or improper conduct 
 
If misuse has occurred, it is the responsibility of the employee to immediately 
bring the misuse to the attention of the department head and the Director of 
Procurement Services. The department head shall investigate all alleged 
misuse complaints received. 

 
Approval to Purchase New Vehicles: The Institution’s Executive Officer (IEO) 
or his/her named “designee” must approve all vehicles purchased.  A Vehicle 
Justification Form is required and must be approved by the IEO or designee.   
See Vehicle Justification Form. 

 
All vehicles purchased by the university are required to be purchased in 
accordance with the established State Contract.  Contact the Office of 
Procurement Services if there is a need for a vehicle that is not on the contract. 
See State Contract at: 
http://www.dfa.state.ms.us/Purchasing/StateContracts/VehicleList070.html. 

 

 
 

IHL Monthly Vehicle Summary Report 
 

Under IHL requirements, university departments that operate vehicles are 
responsible for vehicle policy compliance.  This includes detailed record keeping 
on all fuel, miscellaneous repairs, tires, preventative maintenance including oil 
changes, annual inspections and the general appearance of each vehicle. In 
addition, it is required that a daily travel log of all trips be recorded for each 
university vehicle for in-state and out-of-state travel and must be maintained in a 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2013/11/VehicleJustificationForm111.pdf
http://www.dfa.state.ms.us/Purchasing/StateContracts/VehicleList070.html


6 
 

safe location in each vehicle. The log should include beginning and ending 
odometer readings, total miles traveled, and destination. Do not round up on 
mileage.  

 
The above information will be requested monthly by the University Property 
Officer on all university vehicles for inclusion in the IHL Monthly Institutional 
Vehicle Summary Report.  This report is due at IHL on the 10th of every month. 
Departments will be notified on the 1st of each month regarding the required 
updated vehicle information, and will have until the 7th of each month to furnish 
the information to the Property Office.   

 
While ultimate responsibility for departmental vehicles resides with the    
department head, it is recommended that departments appoint a departmental 
coordinator or liaison responsible for this record keeping responsibility. Failure to 
provide accurate and timely information on each vehicle could result in loss of the 
vehicle (i.e. department must surrender) or an administrative “block” on the 
acquisition of any future vehicle(s) for that department.   

 

 
 

Risk Management 
 

Liability Coverage: The University of Mississippi, as authorized by the IHL 
Board, carries auto liability coverage only on vehicles that are licensed for street 
and highway travel. Proof of insurance (i.e. current insurance cards) must be kept 
in every university vehicle. Insurance cards can be downloaded from the 
Procurement Services website. New cards are required every July 1. 

 
The Mississippi Tort Claims Act provides liability protection for the driver and the 
University.  It is the exclusive remedy under the law while automobiles are being 
used within the scope and course of one’s duties for the University. Within 
Mississippi, the tort limit is $500,000 per occurrence. This limit does not apply 
when out of state.  There is NO liability protection coverage in force when a 
university vehicle is operated unlawfully or for other than official university 
business. 

 
Accidents and Accident Reporting: Immediately report accidents involving a 
university or rented vehicle to law enforcement, the department head, Human 
Resources, and the Director of Procurement Services. Procurement Services will 
complete and process the Automobile Loss Notice. Copies of the reporting form 
will be sent to the University’s insurance company, IHL loss prevention office and 
to the University Attorney’s Office. Post-accident drug testing may be required by 
the university’s Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy. Always obtain the name, 
driver’s license number, tag number, and insurance carrier from any other drivers 
involved in an accident.  See “Motor Vehicle Incident Reporting Instructions for 
Drivers” on page 25 for more specific information. Do not make statements 
except to answer questions asked by law enforcement officials.   

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/
http://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647565


7 
 

 
Injured Employee: For injuries sustained in a work related automobile 
accident, Workers’ Compensation coverage will serve as the exclusive remedy 
to employees injured in a vehicle collision while engaged in the course and 
scope of one’s duties for the University. Injuries should be reported immediately to 
the employee’s supervisor, the department head, Human Resources, and 
Procurement Services.  

 
Injured Passenger (non-employee): Nonemployee(s), including students not 
serving in an employment capacity, injured in an accident while traveling in a 
university vehicle currently have $10,000 of medical coverage per person, per 
accident and do not have workers compensation coverage. For this reason, non- 
employees should be discouraged from traveling in university vehicles. 

 

Emergency Equipment:  University vehicles used for extensive travel away 
from campus are encouraged to carry emergency equipment.  Suggested 
equipment should include fire extinguisher, first aid kit, highway warning 
triangles, and tire pressure gauge. Emergency kits and/or items should be 
fastened securely to vehicle to prevent injury during a crash.   
 

   

 

Vehicle Use Policy 
 

University Vehicle Official Use Policy: University motor vehicles are authorized 
for use in the performance of all travel or tasks necessary to accomplish official 
university business. Use is not authorized for unofficial travel or tasks, the transport 
of unauthorized persons or items, or the performance of tasks outside the rated 
capacity or designed capability of the vehicle. University vehicles should only be 
driven by authorized drivers and only used for official university business. Some 
examples of unauthorized use are: 

 
(1)  Sightseeing or pleasure trips unless the trips are part of the official agenda 

of a business conference. 
(2)  Transporting family members, dependents, or friends to school, daycare, 

medical appointments, social events or other personal activities. 
(3)  Conducting other personal business outside the employee’s scope of 

employment. 

 
Personal Use: Using University or rented vehicles to conduct personal business 
is strictly prohibited by Mississippi Code 25-1-79. Drivers are prohibited from 
taking a university vehicle to their residence unless previously approved by the 
driver’s Vice Chancellor or Provost. Only in extreme circumstances should this be 
approved due to the common perception that university property is being used for 
private purposes. 
 
Vehicle Assignments: University vehicles may not be used in a commuting 



8 
 

capacity solely by virtue of an employee’s job title or position. A commute 
vehicle must be approved by the appropriate Vice Chancellor or Provost and a 
copy of the written approval must be on file with the Office of Procurement 
Services. Before any approval for commuting in a university vehicle will be 
considered, at least one of the following conditions must exist:  
 
(1) Law Enforcement; OR 
(2) Twenty-Four Hour on Call. 

 
Commuting Approval: Once agency approval has been given for an individual 
commuting assignment, the Vice Chancellor or Provost shall be directly 
accountable for ensuring this procedure is followed.  If approved for commuting, 
the university vehicle should be used to commute between campus and the 
individual’s residence ONLY.  It should not be used for personal use (i.e. to run 
errands).  Under certain circumstances, a commute vehicle may be considered 
taxable income to the individual.  University employees and student drivers 
are warned that failure to follow this policy will be addressed immediately 
and will subject the person violating this policy to disciplinary action, 
including possible immediate dismissal from their job. 
 
Commentary: University vehicle operators are charged with an ethical 
responsibility to conduct themselves in a professional and prudent business 
manner. An employee should not engage in any activity that would violate the 
obligation of trust given with the privilege of operating a university vehicle. 
Inappropriate activities or misuse include but are not limited to: 
 
(1) Parking any university vehicle at a compromising establishment for non-

business activities. 
(2) Speeding. 
(3) Failure to take proper care of the vehicle (washing, vacuuming, routine 

maintenance, etc.). 
(4) Using the vehicle for personal use out of the employee’s scope of 

employment. 
 
Operating a University Vehicle: University employees and other authorized 
individuals with a valid driver’s license may drive a university vehicle for official 
university business only. All university departments that operate university 
vehicles are required to have all drivers read and sign the Vehicle Use 
Agreement (see pages 25-26). The agreement contains a provision signifying 
that the driver has received, read, understands, and agrees to comply with the 
fleet policies and procedures.  Departments shall forward a signed copy of this 
form to the Office of Procurement Services. This agreement should be read and 
signed by each driver on a periodic basis after the initial signing. 
 
 
University employees and approved individuals who have an acceptable driving 
record may operate a university vehicle. All drivers who use university vehicles 



9 
 

may have their driving records checked annually by the university. Whenever a 
driver of a university vehicle has his/her driver's license revoked, restricted, or 
suspended, the driver is required to immediately notify his/her supervisor. 

 
Failure to provide timely notification may result in immediate disciplinary action 
to the driver and any university personnel having knowledge of the suspension 
or revocation. Disciplinary action may include the loss of driving privileges for 
university vehicles, suspension from work, and/or possible termination.  
Departments shall avoid allowing employees with unacceptable driving records to 
travel on university business using a university vehicle. At no time can an 
employee with a suspended license operate a university vehicle. 

 
Drivers: Employees and authorized drivers, including students (part time or full 
time) must be at least 18 years old to operate vehicles owned or rented by the 
University. 

 
Personal vehicles are also included in this section when used in an official 
capacity because employees with a valid driver’s license are covered under 
workers compensation and tort liability while on the job. If an unauthorized 
person (i.e. does not have a valid driver’s license) elects to drive, the Travel 
Office will not reimburse gasoline, mileage, or vehicle rental costs. If traveling in 
a personal vehicle under these circumstances, the driver assumes all risk 
associated with the trip. 

 
The UM insurance policy requires drivers to have a valid driver’s license to be 
covered by the policy. Drivers must obey all local and state traffic rules and 
regulations wherever they travel. Tickets for traffic violations (speeding, failure to 
yield, etc.) will be paid by the driver of the vehicle and should be immediately 
reported to Procurement Services. Such traffic fines are not reimbursable to the 
individual and are considered personal expenses. 

 
It is illegal for a driver to operate a University or rented vehicle while under the 
influence of alcohol or illegal drugs. The use of tobacco products is not 
permitted in university vehicles. 
 
Due to pedestrian traffic and vehicle congestion on campus, eating or 
drinking while driving on campus is prohibited. Making or receiving cellular 
telephone calls along with sending or viewing text messages while driving is 
strictly prohibited regardless of where the vehicle is being operated. 

 
Private Vehicles: University officers and employees may be authorized to 
travel on university business using their private automobile. In these cases, 
drivers are typically reimbursed on a per-mile basis (at the same rate as 
federal employees) based on mileage determined by the Mississippi 
Department of Finance and Administration. 

 



10 
 

The University will not reimburse for gasoline used in a personal vehicle 
regardless of the circumstances. University credit cards cannot be used to 
pay for fuel in a private vehicle. Only actual mileage may be reimbursed. 
 
If authorized for official use, privately owned vehicles will be operated and 
maintained in accordance with the policies and procedures established for 
university vehicles. For those drivers utilizing their personal vehicles on 
university business, the following requirements apply: 

 
• Must have a valid driver’s license and meet the same motor vehicle record 

(MVR) and accident criteria as drivers of university vehicles. 
• Automobile liability coverage must be maintained by the driver as 

prescribed by state law. The university shall be provided with evidence of 
this insurance coverage, which clearly lists policy declarations and 
coverage limits, when requested. 

• In case of an accident and subsequent claim, third party losses are 
subject to the protections provided by the Mississippi Tort Claims Act § 
46-11-1 et.al. (Subject to all requirements and limitations only if the loss 
occurred while conducting official university business.) 

• The vehicle must be maintained at owner’s expense. 
• Drivers must comply with all applicable state laws and regulations. 
• Motor vehicle records are subject to inspection at any time.  The driver's 

authorization to operate their personal vehicle for university business 
may be revoked if the motor vehicle record discloses any of the following: 

o The motor vehicle driver’s license is revoked, suspended, 

withdrawn, or denied 

o Operating outside the limitations of a restricted license 

o Driver refuses to undergo drug or alcohol testing in accordance with 
University policies or as required by applicable state or jurisdiction 
laws  

o A conviction for driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of 

alcohol or drugs 
• Regular occasional drivers (those being reimbursed more than six times 

per year for business use) may be required to attend driver safety training 
and meetings. 

 
The University reserves the right to withdraw this privilege at any time. 

 
Vans (15-Passenger): The University prohibits the purchase of 15- passenger 
vans due to safety concerns.  Additionally, the University will not accept donations 
of 15-passenger vans. Vehicles donated to university departments must follow all 
policy requirements of a purchased vehicle. Rental of 15-passenger vans will be 
prohibited unless special permission is granted by Procurement Services.  

 
There are a few 15-passenger vans still owned by the University.  If your 
department operates an older 15-passenger van, consideration should be given 



11 
 

to providing training for drivers as well as reviewing pages 31-36 (Mississippi 
Institutions of Higher Learning Van Safety). 

 
Fifteen-passenger/cargo vans in operation will continue to be used until the 
vehicles are sold or salvaged. Drivers should obey posted speed limits but not 
exceed 65 mph regardless of posted speed limits. Luggage racks or hauling 
items on top of 15-passenger vans is prohibited. 

 
Fifteen-passenger vans are not to be used for trips more than 350 miles one way. 
A bus or several smaller vehicles should be used for trips greater than 350 miles. 
Exceptions may be granted for special circumstances. The back seat is to be removed 
from 15-passenger vans manufactured before 2009. Luggage, boxes or equipment 
inside the van must not be stacked higher than the back of passenger seats. 

 
Drivers must not operate a van continually for more than eight (8) hours and must 
take a thirty (30) minute break every four hours. Trailers or other vehicles must 
not be towed with a van. In 15-passenger vans manufactured prior to 2009, a 
maximum of 10 passengers, including the driver, is permitted with the number 
decreasing by one for every 170 lbs. of cargo; however, these vans may carry 15 
passengers when operated solely on campus.   

 
Animals: Animals are not allowed in university vehicles unless they are 
transported in the conduct of university business or are required by a 
passenger’s disability. 

 
Non- Official Decals: No decals, bumper stickers, commercial advertising, or 
political stickers of any kind may be placed on any university vehicle. Only official 
marking as required by law may be placed on a university vehicle. 

 
Firearms: Firearms are prohibited in university vehicles unless they are 
required for the performance of official job duties. 
 

Seat Belts: Drivers operating university vehicles and front seat passengers are 
required by law to wear seat belts at all times. University policy requires all 
passengers in a university vehicle to wear seatbelts at all times, especially on 
campus.  Drivers are held personally responsible (by the university and by law) 
for not operating the vehicle until seatbelts are fastened.  

 
Personal Property: Personal property in university vehicles is not insured for 
loss or damage by the State. Coverage for these items may be provided by the 
employee’s personal insurance. Drivers are encouraged to discuss such issues 
with their own insurance representative and should consider the addition of a 
“rider” on their own policy. 

 
 
 



12 
 

Rental of Vehicles 

 
The University will allow use of rental cars when there is a demonstrated cost 
savings over other modes of transportation and use of the rental car is not strictly 
for the traveler’s convenience. If an employee uses a rental car instead of a 
private vehicle for travel to their destination, state guidelines require 
documentation of the total rental expense compared to the total mileage expense 
for using a private vehicle. Reimbursement of the lesser expense shall be claimed 
on the Travel Reimbursement Voucher. Please remember that an intermediate 
size vehicle is normally the largest rental that will be reimbursed. Naturally, there 
will be occasions for which a larger vehicle is required. A waiver request form 
should be submitted for approval to the Office of Procurement Services prior to 
making any reservations. 

 
Employees are prohibited from misrepresenting a rental arrangement with a state 
authorized rental car agency (i.e., Enterprise) for personal travel. The rented 
vehicle must be for official university business to request the state rate. 
Employees are prohibited from renting a vehicle and later filing a travel voucher 
that shows using a personal vehicle in order to receive a higher reimbursement 
rate. 

 
Vehicles may be rented for university business in certain circumstances, such as: 
 

• Out of town travel 
• Replacement vehicle for one that is being repaired 
• Transportation of guests 
• Special events 
• Unexpected shortage of transportation resources 

 
While operating a rental vehicle on university business, all requirements of the 
vehicle safety program apply. This includes the following: 
 

• Must have a valid driver’s license and meet the same motor vehicle 
record (MVR) and accident criteria as all other drivers of university 
vehicles. 

• Drivers must comply with all applicable laws and regulations. 
• Only authorized drivers may operate the vehicle. 

 
Vehicle Rental Insurance: Current state contract rental agreements for both in- 
state and out-of-state rentals include free Collision Damage Waiver (CDW) and 
Loss Damage Waiver (LDW) insurance. CDW/LDW covers damage to the rental 
car, and IHL’s existing auto insurance covers third party damage/injuries at the 
fault of the university-authorized driver. The option to purchase insurance should 
always be declined when a vehicle is rented utilizing the state contract. 
Employees will not be reimbursed for insurance purchases when a vehicle is 
rented utilizing the state contract. 



13 
 

Should the employee utilize a vendor that is not on state contract, university 
employees must always be covered by insurance (i.e. either provided by the 
contract or by purchase). However, without proper justification, the employee 
may not be reimbursed for vehicle rentals if the vendor is not on state contract. 
The UM vehicle rental policy and associated state contracts can be found on the 
UM Travel website. 

 
Rental of Buses: The University has discontinued operating a bus service. 
Departments must make arrangements for renting a bus or buses and submit all 
needed paperwork to Procurement for payment.  See “Guide to Hiring Bus 
Companies” on page 37. 

 
 
 

Vehicle Records 
 

Vehicle Numbers: In addition to the unique UM Asset Number (6 digits), each 
vehicle will receive a Unit Number (3 digits); both assigned by Procurement 
Services.  The unit number will be used to identify the vehicle for quick 
identification and reporting purposes.  The inventory number will be used when 
conducting property inventory audits. The unit number will be placed on the 
vehicles by the Physical Plant Department after a proper work order notification 
has been authorized. 

 
Vehicle Titles: Titles shall be titled as follows:  
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Procurement Services 

P.O. Box 1848 
University, MS 38677. 

 
The Office of Procurement Services will be the sole university repository for 
vehicle titles which will be maintained with university vehicle records. The 
Director of Procurement Services or his designee shall have sole authority to sign 
vehicle titles, order titles, and apply for lost titles. 

 
Title applications shall be handled by Procurement Services as well and will be 
used to secure a state-issued tag. If university vehicles are purchased through 
any process other than through the state vehicle contract, it is the department’s 
responsibility to provide complete paperwork to Procurement Services for them 
to obtain the appropriate title. 

 
Vehicle Tags: University vehicles will receive a permanent state-issued tag that 
will remain with the vehicle throughout its useful life as a university vehicle. 
Procurement Services will order the tag and will affix it to the vehicle after 
verification that the vehicle is of the correct color and is properly marked with 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/travel/


14 
 

the required identification stickers/markings. 

 
Marking of University Vehicles: All vehicles, owned or leased by the University 
of Mississippi, shall have a permanent decal or be painted on both sides of the 
vehicle in letters at least three (3) inches in height and on the rear in letters not 
less than one-half (1 ½) inches in height, stating the name of the University. The 
marking must be in a color which is in contrast with the color of the vehicle. The 
provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to vehicles exempted as set forth in 
Section 25-1-87 of the MS Code. 

 
Vehicle Colors: The standard color of university vehicles is white. New vehicles 
ordered from state contract through Procurement Services should conform to this 
paint color unless an exemption has been specifically approved by the Chancellor or 
his/her designee. Recognizing that not all vehicle manufacturers sell vehicles in 
white, departments will need to work with Procurement staff to determine if an 
acceptable color can be found.  When older vehicles are repainted, the standard 
fleet color must be used. 

 
 

 
Maintenance 

 
Maintenance and Care of Vehicles: Maintenance of university property is a vital 
responsibility when considering the best use of tax dollars. All departments are 
urged to establish a written policy which shall describe the planned maintenance 
program for its fleet. This policy shall include mechanisms to assure proper, timely 
preventive maintenance (oil changes, lubrication, etc.) as well as mechanisms to 
track costs to allow management to make proper decisions concerning the 
continued operation of the vehicle. At a minimum, departments should follow the 
manufacturer’s recommended maintenance schedule for each vehicle. 

 
All maintenance and repairs performed on university vehicles must be 
documented and retained for the life of the vehicle. All maintenance and repair 
information and costs shall be entered into the IHL Monthly Vehicle Summary 
Report. The maintenance and upkeep of fleet vehicles is the responsibility of the 
department head and department to which the vehicle is assigned. The 
department head shall enforce the policies and schedules to ensure routine 
service is completed as scheduled. 

 
Annual Safety Inspection: Each department is required to schedule and 
complete the annual state inspection at a state-approved maintenance facility for 
each vehicle assigned to their department. For the university, this facility is the 
University Service Station located at the Physical Plant.  Vehicles with expired 
inspection stickers cannot be operated under any circumstances. 

 
Vehicle Appearance and Operation: University vehicles should be road worthy, 



15 
 

carry proof of insurance and emergency phone numbers. The Physical Plant 
Department has the authority to park (impound) a university vehicle with 
mechanical problems if operating the vehicle could result in a hazard to other 
vehicles or pedestrians. The vehicle will remain impounded until such 
deficiencies are corrected. Each department is strongly encouraged to develop a 
checklist to be updated monthly to ensure vehicles are in acceptable driving 
condition. An example of a checklist is included in this policy (see page 22 for the 
Monthly Vehicle Inspection Checklist). Vehicles should be inspected monthly to 
ensure that the exterior appearance is kept at the highest standard. This is in 
reference to dents, paint damage, a vehicle in need of washing, etc. Departments 
are responsible for maintenance and repair to their vehicles. Small repairs to the 
vehicles may be charged against credit cards. 

 
Vehicle Warranty Tracking: Departments with vehicles are required to comply with 
all warranty/defect notifications sent by all vehicle manufacturers.  A good warranty 
tracking system can prevent departments from paying for repairs or parts that are 
covered under manufacturer warranties.  It is the department’s responsibility to 
follow up on any vehicle warranty notification received.   

 
Routine Washing: It is the department’s responsibility to ensure fleet vehicles 
represent the University of Mississippi appropriately. Vehicles should be cleaned 
inside and out as appropriate for the intended use of the vehicle.  Common sense 
should rule. If in doubt, clean it. It is recommended that all passenger vehicles be 
cleaned inside and out at least once monthly. 
 
Fuel Purchases: All local gasoline purchases shall be obtained from the 
University Service Station using the approved fuel access key assigned to each 
vehicle. No fuel should be purchased from local gasoline dealers in the Oxford 
area. 

 
Only regular unleaded gasoline or diesel from the self-service pumps located at 
the Physical Plant should be used. When on official university travel, no higher- 
octane gas above regular unleaded is to be purchased. The University Service 
Station should also be used for small repairs, oil changes, oil filter changes, etc., 
whenever possible. 

 
Each vehicle shall be issued a unique university fuel access key for that specific 
vehicle. Employees that are assigned vehicles shall be issued a personal 
identification number (SAP employee number) that is to be kept separate from 
the fuel key in the vehicle. When using this key, always enter in the correct 
employee identification number and correct mileage. If a fuel access key is 
stolen or lost, notify the Physical Plant immediately. A replacement key will be 
issued if needed. The fuel access key can only be used to purchase fuel from 
the University Service Station. 

 
Fuel Credit Cards: When justified, departments that engage in official university 



16 
 

travel outside of Oxford may request fuel management cards through the Office 
of Procurement Services. The current state contract fuel management provider is 
Fuel Man.  When submitting fuel invoices for payment, all original pump receipts 
must accompany monthly statements. Failure to include the receipts will result in 
a non-payment of the statement. Vehicle unit numbers must be placed on all fuel 
invoices and corresponding pump receipts submitted for payment. 
The total of all fuel transactions must be entered into the IHL Monthly Vehicle 
Summary Report as well as the total of all vehicle maintenance performed each 
month. This is a mandatory requirement for operating a university vehicle. 

 
Under no circumstances, can a university department use a university- 
authorized fuel credit card (Shell, Chevron – Texaco, BP, Exxon, etc.) or a 
University Service Station fuel access key to place fuel into a personal 
vehicle. There are no exceptions. 

 
Alternative Fuels: The University encourages the use of alternative fuels, 
including, but not limited to, ethanol or biodiesel. Each agency is encouraged to 
purchase alternative fuel vehicles and use alternative fuels when it is determined 
that it would be cost effective and would not cause harm to the university vehicle. 
 
 

Classes of License and Endorsements 
 

Please review Classes of License and Endorsements by following this  
link:  License Class 
 

 
 

Replacement Goals 
 

Replacement Criteria: The following guidelines provide minimum replacement 
goals for routine vehicle replacement. In general, most vehicles should be 
replaced when they reach 6 years (72 months) of service or 120,000 miles, 
whichever comes first. However, there may be circumstances in which vehicles 
may be replaced sooner (such as excessive maintenance or repair costs) or 
retained longer (such as unusually low maintenance costs or low yearly mileage). 
Department heads may make this determination on a case-by-case basis, using 
these guidelines as a starting point for their deliberations. Before disposal or sale 
of any vehicle, the Office of Procurement Services shall make a determination 
that the lifetime use and mileage of the vehicle has been maximized and it would 
not be feasible for another university department to use this vehicle. Procurement 
Services must approve all disposals. 
 
 

Disposal Rules and Regulations 
 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2013/11/classesoflicense101311.pdf


17 
 

Procedures for Selling or Transferring University Vehicles: Departments 
wanting to dispose of a vehicle must notify Procurement Services. Once the 
department and Procurement Services have established the best possible 
method for disposal, the proper paperwork will be started. If the department 
wishes to sell the vehicle and Procurement Services has approved such sale, the 
vehicle will need to be delivered to the vehicle disposal area at Procurement 
Services, where the state tag and all university decals will be removed at the 
department’s expense. 

 
Methods: University vehicles which become surplus to the needs of the 
university may be disposed of in any of the following ways: 
 
(1) Traded 
(2) Transferred 
(3) Sold 

 
Sale of a university vehicle(s) may be accomplished by public auction, sealed 
bid, or private treaty negotiated sale. 

 
Trades: University vehicles, which no longer meet the needs of the University or 
become obsolete or inoperable, but still have a residual value, may be traded as 
a part of the transaction to acquire new vehicles. This method of disposal may 
not be used when acquiring any vehicle from a state contract. The request for 
pricing, which includes a trade-in, must be made a part of the specification for 
the vehicle being purchased. The specification shall contain all pertinent 
information about the vehicle being traded (i.e., make, model, year model, 
mileage, the location where it may be seen, etc.). 

 
Transfers: University vehicles may be transferred to other state agencies 
(including transfers to the Office of Surplus Property). The transfer or sale of a 
vehicle from the University to another state agency or a transfer from the 
University to a governing authority requires approval from the Office of the State 
Auditor – Property Division. 

 
Sale of University Property - Sealed Bid: When disposing of university 
vehicles by sealed bid, the University is required to advertise the sale in the 
same manner as set forth in Section 31-7-13(c) of the MS Code. Such 
advertisement shall be made one time each week for two consecutive weeks and 
shall be made in a newspaper published in the county or municipality in which 
the University is located. Such advertisement should indicate where, when, and 
for how long invitations for bid may be obtained; generally describe the vehicle 
being sold; when and where the vehicle may be seen; and contain other 
pertinent information, but is not required to include detailed specifications. 
University employees are prohibited by law from purchasing any surplus 
university property, including vehicles. There are no exceptions. 
 



18 
 

Auction: Public auctions have long been an acceptable, as well as preferred, 
method of disposing of vehicles that is advantageous to the University. Vehicles 
sold at auction have historically brought more money than those sold by sealed 
bid. Auctioneers or auction companies and the selection of them provides for two 
options, which are: 
 
(1) Auctions that are held on agency property; and 
(2) Auctions held at auction company location 

 
Auctions Held on Agency Property. For logistical reasons, UM does not use 
this option. 
 
Dealer Auctions: There are several dealer auction facilities located throughout 
the state where vehicles may be sold; however, Rea Brothers Mid South Auto 
Auction is the approved primary auction dealer used by the state. To use the 
services of any of these facilities, the company must agree that the sale will be 
open to the public for university vehicles and must agree that the fee charged to 
the seller of university vehicles shall be not more than $50 per vehicle. Auctions 
that are dealer-only sales (auctions that do not allow public participation in the 
auction process) cannot auction university vehicles. 

 
Presently, state-owned vehicles are being sold at the state auction on the first 
Thursday of each month. Any agency wishing to dispose of vehicles in this 
manner may do so by delivering the vehicles along with a signed (undated) title 
to the auction company not later than the Thursday, one week prior to the sale, 
before 5:00 p.m. This will allow the auction to properly advertise the sale of the 
state vehicles. If vehicles cannot be delivered by this cut-off date, the vehicles 
will be held for the next month’s sale. If vehicles arrive at auction after the cut-
off date, they can be stored on auction premises until the next sale date, or the 
owning agency can pick up the vehicles and re-deliver them by the 
next month sale cutoff. The vehicles need to be thoroughly cleaned, and have all 
decals and lettering removed prior to sending them to auction. 

 
Once vehicles are delivered and set for sale at the state auction, no sale may be 
made to the public or to any dealer before crossing the auction block at least one 
time. When vehicles have sold, the auction company will be responsible for 
collecting proceeds from buyers and will provide, to the agency, all documentation 
(bill of sale, mileage certification, etc.). Within 10 working days, the auction 
company will deliver a check for the net proceeds to the selling agency. Any 
auction company handling vehicles owned by state agencies shall be bonded as 
required by law. 



19 
 

Monthly Vehicle Inspection Checklist 
 

 
 

Department:     
Vehicle No:   Date    
Driver’s Name (Printed):    
Inspected by (Name): _  _ 
 
List Problems 
 
[ ] Brakes (Pedal Pressure) _    
[ ] Both Tail Lights   _ 
[ ] Windshield Wipers    
[ ] Windshield Defroster _    
[ ] Horn   _ 
[ ] Mirrors (Adjust before driving)   _ 
[ ] Turn Signals _  _ 
[ ] Backup Lights _   
[ ] Headlights (High & Low Beam)    
[ ] Brake Lights   _ 
[ ] Hazard Lights    
[ ] Seat Belts (Front & Back)    _ 
[ ] Tires    
[ ] Tread            
[ ] Inflation            
[ ] Spare            
[ ] Fluid Levels            
[ ] Gasoline            
[ ] Power Brakes           
[ ] Windshield Washer           
[ ] Oil             
[ ] Coolant            
[ ] Power Steering           
[ ] Transmission           
 

 
 
                   (*Optional for university vehicles)



 20 

Driver’s Pre-Trip Inspection Checklist 

 
The following checklist is designed for drivers with little mechanical knowledge or 
background. Elements included enhance safety and prevent breakdown. This 
inspection should only take a few minutes for a typical automobile. Completion 
will increase the likelihood of a successful trip. Unsatisfactory elements should be 
corrected prior to operation of vehicle. 

 
Vehicle Make & Model   _ Date   _ 

 
ELEMENT (  ) SATISFACTORY (  ) UNSATISFACTORY (OR COMMENT) 

1.  Brakes – do service brakes and parking brake operate? 
2.  Lights – check headlights, high beams, blinkers, tail lights, brake lights, 

back-up light, parking lights and side markers. Are all working? 
3.  Tires – check pressure against p.s.i. noted on tire. Check treads depth (at 

least 1/8 inch). Check for defects such as unusual wear pattern, bubbles 
or deformed sidewalls. 

4.  Belts – are they quiet with engine running? 
5.  Glass – no broken windows, no cracks that interfere with driver’s vision. 

Clean. 
6.  Mirrors – are side and rearview mirrors intact? 
7.  Windshield wipers – do they operate and remove washer fluid when 

tested? 
8.  Windshield washer – is reservoir full, does it pump when operated? 
9.  Engine oil – check dipstick. Any leaks? 
10. Coolant – is fluid to mark on reservoir? 
11. Transmission – check dipstick. Any problems shifting? 
12. Steering – does steering react when steering wheel is turned? Any noise? 
13. Occupant restraints – are all seatbelts and airbags present? Do seatbelts 

operate properly? 
14. State inspection sticker – is a current inspection sticker in lower driver’s 

side corner of windshield? 
15. License Plate – is a license plate mounted and easily seen? 
16. Emergency equipment – is there a jack, lug wrench, flashlight, etc.? 
17. Keys – do keys operate ignition and all locks? Are a spare set of keys 

available? 
 

Note: Consider a similar checklist for use when returning a vehicle after a trip to 
report needed repairs. 

 
 
           (*Optional) 

 
 
 

 
 



 21 

Vehicle Use Agreement 
 

Operating a university vehicle is a privilege. All drivers will be responsible and 
accountable to: 
 

• Possess a valid motor vehicle driver’s license. This license must have the 
appropriate classification and any required endorsements needed for 
operating the vehicle(s) assigned to the operator. 

• Be subject to a driver’s motor vehicle record check, and if such records 
show a suspension or revocation of driving privileges, the driver will not be 
authorized to operate a motor vehicle for the University. 

• Operate university vehicles for official university business only. 
• Operate motor vehicles in a safe manner at all times. 
• Comply with all applicable state laws and regulations. 
• Maintain vehicle in a safe operating condition. 
• Maintain vehicle in accordance with the maintenance schedule. 
• Report moving violations to their Supervisor. 
• Report changes in their driver’s licensing to Human Resources or the 

Office of Procurement Services. 
• Accurately record and report vehicle mileage in accordance with university 

procedures (i.e. daily travel log). 
• Participate in required driver safety education and training programs. 
• Require all occupants to use seat belts, child safety seats, booster seats, 

or other restraint devices at all times. 
• Pay all moving/parking violation fines and fees. 
• Keep automobile ID cards in the vehicle glove box at all times, including 

proof of liability coverage. 
• Refrain from towing any personal equipment (boats, campers, etc.) with a 

university vehicle. 
• Not alter vehicles leased, owned, or rented by the University in any way. 
• Never deactivate air bags on any vehicles leased/owned by the University, 

rented vehicles or personal vehicles used for university business. 
• Never operate a computer while the vehicle is moving. 
• Pull off the road to a safe location prior to making or receiving phone calls. 
• Comply with university policy on transport of passengers. 

 
Operating privileges shall be revoked if: 
 

• Driver does not adhere to responsibilities listed above. 
• The driver’s license is revoked, suspended, withdrawn, or denied. 
• Driver refuses to undergo drug or alcohol testing in accordance with 

university policies or as required by applicable state or jurisdiction laws. 
• Operating outside the limitations of a restricted license. 

 
 
 
 



 22 

In case of vehicle damage: 
 

• Report any vehicle damage to the University immediately. 
• Police reports, witness statements or other pertinent documents should be 

obtained and forwarded to the University. 
• The driver shall cooperate with representatives of the University, including 

insurance company personnel, and obtain written repair estimates from 
reputable shops or authorized dealerships as instructed. If it becomes 
necessary to rent another vehicle during repairs, the driver will be 
instructed as to provisions for a rental vehicle. 

• Drivers should not make verbal or written statements concerning an 
incident during its immediate aftermath except to law enforcement officials 
or representatives of the University or its agents. 

 
I, _  __, have read and understand the 
University of Mississippi’s Motor Vehicle Policy and Fleet Management Guide. I 
agree to abide by the provisions of this policy. I understand that violation of this 
policy may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of 
employment. 

 

 
 

  _     
Driver’s Signature  Supervisor’s Signature 

 
  _ 
Driver’s License Number (required) 

 
  _ 

Date Date 
 
 
 
 
 

         (*Mandatory for drivers of university vehicles)



 23 

Motor Vehicle Incident Reporting Instructions for Drivers 
 

General Information: The following information should be kept in all vehicles 
used for university business: 

• Phone number(s) to which incidents are to be reported. 
• Insurance carrier information that can be provided to other involved 

parties. Current proof of coverage from the liability insurance carrier 
should always be kept in vehicle. 

• Instructions for notifying the university’s insurance carrier (see insurance 
card) 

• Instructions for contacting law enforcement and emergency personnel; 
and instructions for contacting roadside assistance services, if available. 

• Instructions for leaving the incident scene intact, securing the scene 
against further collisions or injuries until emergency personnel arrive, and 
meeting regulatory requirements (if any) for blood alcohol testing. 

• A reminder to the driver that he or she should not make a statement 
after the incident. 

Materials to consider placing in vehicle may also include a disposable camera for 
documenting the scene, a witness card for recording initial comments and 
contact data from potential witnesses, and a pen or pencil. 

 
Incident Information: Recommended information to be collected in the event of 
a motor vehicle incident are as follows: 

• Name of other driver(s) 
• Address of other driver(s) 
• Phone number(s) of other driver(s) 
• Driver’s license number(s) of other driver(s) 
• License plate number(s) 
• Vehicle make and model 
• Name of insurance carrier 
• Insurance policy number 
• Name, address, and phone number(s) of all parties involved in the 

incident, including passengers in each vehicle 
• Name, address, and phone number(s) of all witnesses 
• Date and time of the incident 
• Location of the incident (intersection or milepost) 
• The party to whom the driver’s vehicle was registered (e.g., the University, 

the driver, another individual, or a rental agency) 
• Name and phone number(s) of the investigating law enforcement officer 

on the scene, if any 
• Any other entities responding at the scene (e.g., fire department, 

ambulance, hazardous materials unit) 
• Citations issued 
• A detailed narrative of the incident 
• Space to allow the driver to make a sketch or diagram of the incident 

scene 



 24 

Factors to Consider during an Incident Review 

 
During a review of a motor vehicle incident, possible contributing factors may be 
considered using the following framework: 

 
Driver: 
 

• Driver’s work schedule for at least the week preceding the incident 
• Length of time on duty since the previous break prior to the incident 
• Fatigue 
• Scheduling demands on driver 
• Motor vehicle record history 
• Physical condition of the driver at the time of the incident 
• Physical limitations of the driver at the time of the incident 
• Training history 
• Driver’s emotional state 

 
Vehicle: 
 

• Maintenance and inspection records 
• Vehicle condition 
• Damage to the vehicle from the incident 
• Suitability and safety of the vehicle for the work task 
• Vehicle control layout 
• Modifications to the vehicle that may have contributed to the incident 

 
Operating Environment: 
 

• Weather 
• Road conditions 
• Traffic conditions 
• Route planning 
• Delivery or service schedules 

 

 

The following reference sources provide further information on factors that may 
be considered in determining causation: 

 
Large-Truck Crash Causation Study: An Initial Overview. U.S. Department of 
Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 

 
A Guide to Determine Motor Vehicle Accident Preventability 
National Safety Council 

 
Accident Countermeasures Manual U.S. Department of Transportation. 

http://www.ped.state.nm.us/div/fin/trans/dl/adjudicate.pdf
http://stidhamreconstruction.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Accident-Counterm.pdf


 25 

MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DRIVER RECORDS 
REQUEST 

DRIVER SERVICES POLICY: 6-9(A) 
 
 
NAME ____________________________________________________________ 
 
DRIVER LICENSE NO: _________________DOB: _______________ 
 
I HEREBY GRANT THE UNIVERSITY OF MISSISSIPPI PERMISSION TO 
OBTAIN THE FOLLOWING RECORDS RELATING TO THE ABOVE-NAMED 
PERSON: 
 
Record Requested: MVR Summary 
 
Authorized persons that drive or operate University of Mississippi vehicles must 
possess a valid driver’s license. The MVR Summary report will be obtained from 
the Mississippi Department of Public Safety for use by the University of Mississippi 
for the sole purpose to obtain or verify information relating to the holder of a valid 
driver license, commercial or otherwise. 
 
I understand the personal information furnished is confidential under Federal and 
State law and is being released to the University of Mississippi only for the reason 
indicated above and that it is unlawful for the university to furnish the information to 
an unauthorized person or entity. 
 
Printed Name of Individual: ________________________________ 
 
Signature: ____________________________ Date: ___________ 
 
 

(*Mandatory for drivers of university vehicles)



 26 

Mississippi Institutions of Higher Learning 
Van Safety Recommendations 

for 15-Passenger Vans 
 

Please review Mississippi Institutions of Higher Learning  
Van Safety Recommendations for 15-Passenger Vans at this link:   
Mississippi Institution of Higher Learning Van Safety Recommendations 

 
 

Considerations When Hiring Bus 
Companies 

 
Using a list of pre-qualified bus companies for transporting people to and from 
activities is the simplest way to ensure continuity and safety when outside 
vendors must be used. 

 
A. For criteria in establishing such a list, request the bus company's USDOT 
number, and log on to  http://www.safer.fmcsa.dot.gov/ for information, including: 
 

• the bus company's current USDOT safety rating, if issued, and the date 
of the company's last compliance review (on-site inspection by motor 
carrier safety authorities) 
• whether the company is authorized to transport passengers for hire 
• whether the company has current insurance in force 
• the company's record of regulatory violations and roadside out-of-service 
violations, with a comparison to national averages 
• the company's highway crash history 

 
B. Whether or not you are working from a list of pre-qualified bus companies, ask 
the following questions and include similar language in contracts: 
 

• Does the driver have a current commercial driver's license (CDL) with a 
passenger endorsement? 
• Does the driver possess a valid medical certificate? 
• Does the company have a driver drug and alcohol testing program that 
complies with USDOT regulations? 
• Will your trip be completed within the legal limit of 10 driving hours? If 
not, will there be a second driver or overnight rest stop scheduled to 
legally complete the trip? 
• Does the company have its buses inspected annually? By whom? 
• Does the company have the required $5 million of public liability 
insurance? 
• Can the University be named as an additional insured and certificate 
holder? 
• Does the company subcontract with others for equipment and/or drivers? 
If so, what is the name of the second bus company and its USDOT 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2013/11/mshigherlearnvan1013112.pdf
http://procurement.olemiss.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2013/11/mshigherlearnvan1013112.pdf
http://www.safer.fmcsa.dot.gov/


 27 

number? 
• Does the company have notification procedures for roadside 
emergencies and breakdowns? Is the driver equipped with a wireless 
communications device? 

 
For more information on charter bus safety, visit: 
http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/passenger-safety/tips-chartering-bus 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/passenger-safety/tips-chartering-bus

