
The University of Mississippi  

Drug and Alcohol Testing 

 

Summary/Purpose:  In furtherance of the University’s interest to maintain a drug-free workplace, the 

University reserves the right to test any University employee, contracted worker, or external constituent 

affiliated with the University for alcohol and/or controlled substances using these guidelines. 

In furtherance of the University’s interest to maintain a drug-free workplace, the University reserves the 

right to test any faculty, staff, student worker, contractor, consultant, vendor, or employment candidate for 

alcohol and/or controlled substances when (1) there is a reasonable suspicion that the individual may be 

under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances while at work, (2) the individual has been offered 

a position within a department or unit that is mandated to conduct a post-offer drug screening prior to 

active employment due to state or federal regulations, or grant/contract stipulations, or (3) the individual 

is involved in a vehicle accident while operating a university owned, assigned, rented or leased vehicle or 

utility transport vehicle ( i.e. golf cart, Gator).  This policy applies regardless of whether or not the 

individual was at fault in the accident. 

1. Reasonable Suspicion  

a. Prior to drug or alcohol testing for reasonable suspicion, the department must 
coordinate with the Department of Human Resources. Supervisors should notify 

Human Resources of the need for the testing. When reasonable suspicion exists, the 

individual who made the observations should submit a written record to the 

Department of Human Resources documenting the basis for the suspicion.  A 

Reasonable Suspicion Record Form can be found on the Human Resources website. 

 

b. If the observed behavior occurs during a shift when the Department of Human. 
Resources is closed, the individual is to be taken for testing at that time. The 

Department of Human Resources is to be notified as soon as the office reopens. The 

Human Resources department head or designee will review the individual 

circumstances with the employee’s unit head and recommend appropriate action.  

 

2. Post Offer  

a. Prior to beginning work in positions within designated departments or units, 
employees will be tested for controlled substance use as required for compliance with 

state and federal regulations or as contracts/grants mandate.  New employee offers 

are contingent upon completion of drug tests with results revealing the absence of 

drug use. Hiring departments will coordinate with the Department of Human 

Resources to schedule required tests. Any employee who tests positive for drugs will 

not be allowed to begin work. The offer of employment will be withdrawn unless 

documentation is provided by the employee to the University's Medical Review 

Officer justifying the presence of the drug.  

 

3. Post-Vehicular Accident  

a. The Office of Procurement and the Department of Human Resources should be 
notified of the accident as soon as possible. Failure to report vehicular accidents in a 

timely manner may result in disciplinary action. 

 



b. Post-vehicular accident breath alcohol tests (BAT) should be conducted within two 
(2) hours following the vehicle accident.  

  

c. Drug substance screens should be conducted within 32 hours following the vehicle 
accident.  

 

d. If a vehicular accident occurs Monday - Friday, 8 a.m. - 5 p.m., supervisors should 
contact the Department of Human Resources to schedule screenings.  The driver of 

the vehicle involved in an accident should be escorted to Baptist Memorial Hospital-

North Mississippi, where the testing is to be conducted.    

 

e. If the vehicular accident occurs outside the normal work day, the supervisor will be 
responsible for ensuring the individual is escorted to Baptist Memorial Hospital-

North Mississippi laboratory (without prior scheduling by Human Resources) within 

the required time frame (two hours for breath alcohol tests and 32 hours for substance 

testing) and for notification of the accident to Human Resources the next business 

day.  

 

f. In the event a vehicular accident occurs at a remote location and the driver is unable 
able to return to the Oxford University Area, the breath-alcohol screening will not be 

required.  However, if return is possible within 32 hours, the involved driver will be 

required to undergo substance testing and should be escorted to Baptist Memorial 

Hospital-North Mississippi laboratory for such testing. 

 

g. The supervisor is responsible documenting any circumstances that prohibited the 
return to the Oxford-University Area for the breath-alcohol testing and/or substance 

screenings and must provide such documentation to Human Resources.  

 

h. Return to driving a university vehicle is prohibited until a negative test result has 
been confirmed.   

 

i. Individuals who test positive, or who refuse to submit to testing, will be prohibited 
from driving any university vehicle and may be subject to other disciplinary action, 

up to and including, termination of employment or the contractual relationship.   

Supervisors should consult with Human Resources regarding options for disciplinary 

action. 

 

j. No centralized funding is provided for expenses related to alcohol and/or substance 
testing.  Department accounts will be directly charged by the Department of Human 

Resources for these expenses. The Department of Human Resources serves as liaison 

between University departments and the testing provider to process billing for 

services. 

 

k. Departments who engage contractors, consultants or other external affiliates will be 
responsible for communicating screening protocols with those contractual 

individuals/entities and for arranging reimbursement of expenses. Screening 

protocols should be included in agreements/contracts with vendors and external 

constituents.  

 


