
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Cancellation and Refund Policies 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The University of Mississippi Bursar’s policy on refunding money after a 
student withdrawal or decrease in hours. 
 
 

1. If you are unable to attend The University of Mississippi for any reason, you must 
officially withdraw.  

a. You may withdraw online through myOleMiss using your WebID.  Once logged 
on, you should choose the Registration tab and choose Drop to Zero Hours and 
follow the steps. 

b. If you officially withdraw PRIOR to the first day of classes for the semester or 
term, you will receive a credit for 100 percent of tuition, fees (with the exception 
of the nonrefundable registration fee), housing, and any remaining balance on 
meal plan or Ole Miss Express.  

c.  Any financial aid that you received for the semester or term must be repaid in 
full, and will be posted to your student account in the Bursar’s Office. 

  
2. After classes begin, UM has two withdrawal/drop periods.  One period pertains to 

refunding of tuition and fees, and the other period pertains to recording of grades on your 
transcript.  

a. The periods for withdrawing from UM or dropping from full-time to part-time 
status to receive a refund of tuition and fees are as follows:  

i. Fall or spring semester  
1. First 10 class days of the semester  
2. There are no refunds after the 10th class day.  

ii. Intersession terms 
1. First two class days of the term  
2. There are no refunds after the second class day.  

iii. Full summer term (pertains only to a course that is taught the full eight-
week term)  

1. First five class days of the term  
2. There are no refunds after the fifth class day.  

iv. First or second summer terms, first or second fall, first or second spring  
1. First three class days of the term  
2. There are no refunds after the third class day.  

v. Refunds are determined as follows:  
1. If you withdraw from UM during the refund period, you will 

receive a 100 percent refund of tuition less a processing fee of up 
to $100.  

a. If you receive any financial aid, the Office of Financial Aid 
will perform a calculation to determine a prorated amount 
of funds that must be repaid. Any repayments will be 
posted to your student account in the Bursar’s Office.  

b. Certain fees are nonrefundable such as registration fee and 
international student health insurance.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

c. Refunds for meal plans, Ole Miss Express and Flex are 
determined by the ID Center.  

2. If you drop from full-time to part-time status during the refund 
period, you will receive a 100 percent refund of tuition for the 
difference between full time and part time.  

a. If you receive any financial aid, the Office of Financial Aid 
will perform a calculation to determine a prorated amount 
of funds that must be repaid.  Any repayments will be 
posted to your student account in the Bursar’s Office.  

b. Certain fees are nonrefundable such as registration fee and 
international student health insurance.  

b. The periods for dropping a course for the purpose of avoiding grade liability are 
determined by the Office of the Registrar. 

 
Committee on Refunds • Due to extenuating circumstances, students may petition for 
consideration of a tuition refund not provided for in the University’s Refund Policy.  Petitions 
with complete details of the situation including supporting documentation should be sent to 
Committee on Refunds, Office of the Bursar, P.O. Box 1848, University, Mississippi 38677. 
Petitions must be received within one year of the 1st day of class for the semester for which the 
appeal is being made.  An appeal form can be found on the Office of the Bursar’s website under 
Refund Information.  Petitions for refunds of housing costs should be sent to the Housing 
Appeals Committee, Student Housing and Residence Life. 

 
 
 
 
 


