
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Hazardous Waste Accumulation Area 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Hazardous Waste Accumulation Area Policy details the minimum 
requirements for the storage of Hazardous Waste in areas where the material is produced. 
  
Satellite Storage Areas - Federal regulations (40 CFR 262.34(c)(1)) allow a generator to 
accumulate as much as 55 gallons of non-acute hazardous waste or one quart of acutely 
hazardous waste in containers at or near any point of generation where wastes initially 
accumulate, provided that all of the following conditions are met:  
 
STORAGE REQUIREMENTS  

1. Post a copy of this sheet to designate your accumulation area. 
2. The storage area must be under the control of the operator of the process generating the 

waste. 
3. The waste must be placed in containers that are in good condition, 
4. The waste must be compatible with the containers, 
5. The containers are covered when the generator is not adding or removing waste, and, 
6. The accumulation area MUST be at or near any point of generation. 

 
LABEL REQUIREMENTS  

1. The containers must be marked with the words "Hazardous Wastes" and other words that 
identify the contents, and, 

2. Each container must be labeled with the full name of the chemical components. No 
abbreviations are acceptable. 

3. A Generic Solvent Label "Hazardous Waste Solvents", "Caution: Flammable", followed 
by a list of the potential solvents, is appropriate for Jerricans, Carboys or other 5 gallon 
solvent collection containers. As noted above, the container must be labeled with the full 
name of the chemical components. No abbreviations are acceptable. 

 
Any accumulation of hazardous waste at a satellite area in excess of 55 gallons, or one quart of 
any acutely hazardous waste must be marked with the date the excess amount began 
accumulating, and must be moved into to the Hazardous Waste Storage Facility within three 
days.  
 
What you need to know...  

 Segregate waste chemicals by compatibility 
 Designate a single location for the storage of hazardous waste. 
 Find a location out of the way of normal lab traffic, but still accessible to employees. 
 Whenever possible, keep hazardous waste in secondary containers (trays, buckets, etc.) 
 Fully Label the containers. 
 Fume hoods should not be used as designated waste storage areas. 
 Call Laboratory Services (915) 5433 to have waste chemicals removed. 


