
The University of Mississippi 

 

KEYS AND ACCESS CARDS 

 

Purpose/Summary: This policy defines the expectations for appropriate use of residence 

hall room keys.  

 

Students residing in residence halls and apartments are issued a key at the time of check in. The 

responsibility for the safe-keeping of the key falls upon the student. In the Northgate apartments 

residents are responsible for a front door key and a bedroom key. Should a key be lost or stolen, 

the student should contact their Graduate Community Director or Resident Manager immediately 

for a lock change. A lock change request will be submitted and a fee of $79 (includes two keys) 

plus $8 for each additional key, or current locksmith fee, will be assessed to the student’s bursar 

account. University keys cannot be duplicated. In addition, due to fire code, the addition of locks 

to doors is not allowed. All keys and access cards must be returned at the time occupancy is 

terminated to avoid lock change charges.  

 

Students residing in Campus Walk apartments are issued keys at the time of check in. Students 

are responsible for the safe keeping of these keys. In Campus Walk apartments, each resident is 

responsible for a front door key, a bedroom key, and a shared apartment mailbox key. If a key is 

lost, the student should contact the CA immediately. A lock change order will be submitted to 

the University locksmith and a fee of $55 or the current locksmith fee will be assessed to the 

student’s account. University keys may not be duplicated.  

 

Village apartment Keys will be issued to the resident at check-in. Only one key per adult resident 

will be issued. An extra key may be issued to a child age 12 or older. A parent must accompany 

the child to sign for the key. A temporary key may be borrowed from the Department of Student 

Housing office but must be returned within 24 hours. If a key is not returned, the resident will be 

charged for a lock change. Keys may not be reproduced, nor will they be issued to guests. If a 

key is borrowed from the office, an ID must be presented and left until the key is returned. 


