
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Lodging - Travel 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Handling of lodging expenses when in travel status. 

 

 

All expenses must be necessary and reasonable. Government rates must always be used if it is 

the lowest rate available. The rate must be confirmed at the time the reservations are made and 

again at check-in. 

 

All hotel or motel expenses must be documented with a paid itemized original bill. An itemized 

paid receipt is required for lodging booked through the Internet. Express Checkout receipts 

that do not provide an itemized hotel bill are not acceptable documentation for 

reimbursement. 

 

Staying with a relative or friend should be footnoted on the travel reimbursement voucher 

explaining the absence of a hotel/motel receipt. 

 

Lodging at other than hotels or motels (apartments, dormitories, etc.) may be used when they 

result in a lower cost. Payment to an individual for staying in a private home is not allowed. 

 

In State Lodging 

The State Travel Office maintains an updated agreement with various Mississippi hotels for state 

employee rates for official business travel.  The contract for hotels/motels is a convenience 

contract.  Employees must always request the state contract rate, and this rate should be 

confirmed both at the time reservations are made and at check in. 

 

Out-Of-State Lodging  

Interstate discounted lodging is frequently available through government rate programs. Often 

times, major chains will honor these rates. When traveling out of state on official business 

always request the government rate. The employee’s University I.D. card is verification of 

employment. 

 

Lodging Shared With a Family Member 

An employee in travel status, if accompanied by someone who is not an employee of the 

University on official business (spouse, children, etc.), is entitled to reimbursement at the single 

room rate. The desk clerk should write the single room rate on the paid bill and sign it; 

otherwise, the travel clerk will reimburse one-half of the cost of the room.  

 

Lodging Shared With Another University Employee 

If a university employee shares a room with another university employee, they should request 

from the hotel separate invoices at the time they register. If the hotel is not willing to 

accommodate with separate invoices, then each should pay their portion of the bill and claim 

only that amount on their reimbursement. Each employee should reference the other employee 

on their reimbursement and place a copy of the original invoice with the reimbursement voucher. 

 

http://www.dfa.state.ms.us/Purchasing/StateContracts/HotelMotelServicesContractsList.html

