
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Travel Authorization 
 

Summary/Purpose:  When a travel authorization is required. 
 
 
1. In-state and out-of-state travel to a convention, association, or meeting. Section 25-1-83 
of the Mississippi Code requires written approval from the department head for employee 
attendance at any convention, association, or meeting in order for expenses to be reimbursed. A 
convention, association, or meeting is any program which is sponsored by a local, regional, or 
national organization to conduct an annual meeting, share information, present research papers, 
augment professional development, etc. Participation involves payment of a fee (registration, 
conference, tuition, etc.) to the sponsoring program.  
 
 The traveler’s department head should approve the completed authorization form. Travel 
authorization forms for department heads/chairs must be signed/approved by their 
dean/administrative head. Travel authorization forms for senior management (i.e., vice 
chancellors) and department heads with a direct reporting line to the Chancellor, must be 
signed/approved by the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance, or his designee.  Travel 
authorization forms for the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance must be 
signed/approved by the Chancellor, or his designee.  The signatory officer for the account that 
will fund the travel must also sign the travel authorization form. 
  
2. International Travel has been defined by the State of Mississippi as travel outside of the 
continental United States.  Canada, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Mexico are considered International 
Travel. Travel to Alaska is considered within the continental limits of the United States and 
meals would be reimbursed at the maximum state reimbursement rate allowed.  
 
The employee’s Vice Chancellor or the Provost, the Chancellor and the Office of Procurement 
Services must sign the travel authorization form prior to any trip involving International Travel.  
First, the traveler must complete a request for approval of international travel form and include a 
written statement that fully explains the specific benefits to the University from this travel and 
how this travel supports University goals and mission.  This form must be signed by the traveler 
and his/her supervisor.  This completed request form must be attached to the associated travel 
authorization form prior to obtaining Provost/Vice Chancellor and Chancellor signatures.  Once 
the travel authorization has been approved by the Chancellor, both the original request for 
approval of international travel form and the original travel authorization form should be 
submitted to Procurement Services for processing.  

Funding for International Travel must come from self generated funds.  No business area “10” 
accounts can be used for International Travel reimbursement. 

Before making a trip where authorization is required, the employee should have an 
authorization number verifying approval.  Failure to obtain authorization when required 
will cause inability to reimburse expenditures.  
 


