
   

The University of Mississippi 

 

University of Mississippi Drug-Free Workplace and Workforce 
 
 

 
Summary/Purpose: The University of Mississippi is committed to maintaining a drug-free 

workplace and workforce in conformity with federal laws as set forth in the Drug-Free Workplace 

Act of 1988 and the Department of Defense (DOD) Drug-Free Workforce Rule of 1988. 

 
The University of Mississippi is committed to maintaining a drug-free workplace and workforce in 

conformity  with  federal  laws  as  set  forth  in  the  Drug-Free  Workplace  Act  of  1988 (41 

U.S.C.A. Section 8101 et seq.), as amended, and  the Department of Defense (DOD) Drug-Free 

Workforce Rule of 1988. In the interest of a healthy workforce, and as a result of the law, the 

University of Mississippi is a drug-free workplace.  Faculty and staff members are specifically 

prohibited from possessing, using, manufacturing, selling, distributing, or in any other way involving 

themselves with controlled substances both on and off campus, except as permitted in the relevant 

legislation. 

 
For purposes of this policy, the terms "faculty and staff members" shall specifically include all 

personnel employed by the University, whether full-time or part-time. The terms "controlled 

substances" shall mean those drugs and substances set forth in Schedules I through V of Section 202 

of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812), and as further defined by regulation at 21 C.F.R. 

1300.11 Through 1300.15.  The term “workplace” is any location where a faculty or staff member is 
functioning within his or her job capacity. 

 

Workplace and Health Risks 

 

The University is committed to providing a safe work environment and a workplace free from the use 

of controlled substances and misuse of prescribed medications; therefore, such activities are 

prohibited.  Employees must refrain from the use of controlled substances while on duty, which 

includes on call assignments and University business conducted at off-site locations.  Substance abuse 

may affect the workplace as well as impose harm to the individual.    Impairments may affect job 

performance, increase absenteeism, cause serious accidents, and result in decreased morale.  The use 

of controlled substances may cause health risks; such as, stroke, cardiovascular and lung disease, 

seizures, miscarriage, and birth defects.   

 

Notification of Convictions 

 

Any faculty or staff member who has been convicted of a criminal drug statute violation occurring in 

the workplace must notify the Department of Human Resources no later than five (5) days after the 

conviction. 

 
1. Upon notification of such a conviction, the University will initiate appropriate personnel 

action within thirty (30) days of such notification. 

 
2. Upon notification of such a conviction, the University is required by law to notify the 

applicable funding agency(s) within ten (10) days if the faculty or staff member is working in 

a position that is funded by federal monies. 

 



   

Sanctions 

 
1. Depending upon the facts relating to any drug conviction or use, the employee may be: 

suspended pending further investigation; required to participate satisfactorily in a drug abuse 

assistance or rehabilitation program; issued a formal warning; or terminated. For disciplinary 

actions, up to and including termination, the applicable procedure will apply, based upon the 

status of the employee (i.e. faculty/staff, within probationary period/outside probationary 

period, temporary/permanent, level of responsibility, etc.). Any action will be initiated within 

thirty (30) days after the facts have become known by the University.   

 

 When made aware of illegal activity, the University may be obligated to notify the appropriate 

University, municipal, state, and/or federal law enforcement agency. Employees convicted of 

violations of federal or state criminal drug statutes may be subject to fines and/or 

imprisonment. 

 

2. If a faculty or staff member fails to notify the Department of Human Resources of any 

criminal drug statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace within five (5) 

days after such conviction, he/she will be suspended pending investigation with termination 

possible. 

 
3. For purposes of this policy, "conviction" means a finding of guilt (including a plea of nolo 

contendere) or imposition of sentence, or both, by any judicial body charged with the 

responsibility to determine violations of the federal or state criminal drug statutes. 

 

Drug-Free Awareness Program 
 

The University has established a Drug-Free Awareness Program which is administered through the 

University Counseling Center and the Department of Human Resources. This program provides 

supervisory training programs in the identification of illegal drug use, drug counseling for any 

student or employee, and confidential referrals to rehabilitation programs approved for such purposes 

by a federal, state, or local health, law enforcement, or other appropriate agency.   

 

The Employee Assistance Program provides short-term, inpatient services to faculty and staff for 

work-related conflicts, marital conflicts, divorce issues, child-rearing issues, alcohol/drug issues, 

stress reduction, grief/loss issues, depression, and anxiety.  Employees who may need long-term 

consultation or other services to achieve the goals of their treatment plan may be referred to other 

counseling, treatment, rehabilitation services available in Oxford and surrounding communities.  

Information about the Employee Assistance Program is disseminated to employees at new hire 

orientation and during the annual University Health Fair and University Benefits Fair.  Additional 

information about the Employee Assistance Program is available on the University of Mississippi 

Counseling Center website and in the Employee Assistance Program policy which can be accessed on 

the University’s policy website. Faculty and staff who seek services through the Employee Assistance 

Program shall be protected from abuse and retaliatory action. The University respects the rights of its 

employees and will protect the confidentiality of medical information to the fullest extent possible.   

 

To ensure compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 notification requirement, this 

policy will be distributed to faculty and staff on an annual basis.   All newly employed faculty and 

staff, whether exempt or non-exempt, temporary or permanent, will receive a copy of this policy 

during in-hire processing. 

 


