
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 11  

Policies on Distance Education and Off-Campus Programs 
 

Preface 

 

This is a set of policies and procedures for distance education and off-campus courses and 

programs offered by the University of Mississippi (the University).  Distance education offerings 

are administered by the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education.  Additionally, this 

policy addresses the relationship between distance education activities offered by this university 

and those programs involving other institutions. 

 

Important issues covered in this policy include the role of faculty in the approval of distance 

education courses and programs, the integration of such programs with our traditional 

offerings, the student learning outcomes of distance education programs, faculty involvement 

with distance education, and learning support services. 

 
The following are guiding principles upon which the policies are based: 

 

 The faculty has a collective responsibility to ensure the academic quality and integrity 

of courses and degree programs. 

 Distance education (DE) and off-campus (OC) courses and programs should be 

consistent with the academic mission of the University. 

 All courses shall include the opportunity for adequate interactions between faculty and 

students, as well as communication among students when possible. 

 Admissions criteria for degree programs should be equivalent for on- and off-

campus sites. 

 Student learning outcomes should be comparable for programs offered via various 

modes. 

 Students should have adequate access to learning resources and student support services. 

 The University should provide appropriate training and support services for faculty 
who teach distance education and off-campus courses. 

 All distance education and off-campus offerings must adhere to the Southern 

Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) distance 

learning criteria, and, where applicable, to the appropriate accreditation association 

guidelines for the individual disciplines. 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 11  

I. Definition of Terms 
 

Distance Education (DE) consists of all arrangements for providing instruction through 

technology-based delivery modes to persons engaged in planned learning in a place or at a time 

different from that of the instructor or instructors.  Instruction may be synchronous or 

asynchronous.  Synchronous indicates the instructors and students communicate in real time, 

while asynchronous indicates the instructors and students participate and communicate at 

different times.  

 

A regional campus or delivery site is a location (collectively referred to as an off-campus (OC) 

location) that is physically at a distance from the main campus.  Instruction at off-campus 

locations may use the traditional instructor-class format or a DE technology, such as a class 

taught at the main campus that is transmitted to an off-campus location using technology-based 

instruction.  A course delivered off campus in a traditional instructor-class format is considered a 

DE course only if the course also involves a significant degree of technology-based instruction.  A 

“significant degree” is defined by the criterion that a student’s success in the class requires him or 

her to have access to the DE technology (i.e., the student cannot have a reasonable chance to 

achieve comparable learning and class success by employing non-technology based methods).  By 

this definition, an off-campus course, in which an instructor supplements a traditional in-person 

delivery with on-line delivery or materials, may or may not be considered a DE course, depending 

on how significant the on-line component is to successfully learning the subject matter. 

 

Instruction refers to any course that results in academic credit.  Non-credit-based courses are 

not required to be governed by this policy statement. 

 

Technology-based instruction includes, but is not limited to, instruction that uses the 

internet; one-way and two-way transmissions through open broadcast, closed circuit, cable, 

microwave, broadband lines, fiber optics, satellite, or wireless communications devices; audio 

conferencing; or video cassettes, DVD’s, and CD-ROMs, television, other electronic media, 

and a combination of telephone with any of the above video modes. 

 

Learning management systems refer to such programs as Blackboard, which can provide an 

internet-based interface for online communication between instructors and students.  This type 

of system enables posting of course content, assignments, announcements, e-mail contact, and 

chat room. 

 

A hybrid course describes a course in which some traditional face-to-face instruction has been 

replaced with online learning activities or other technology-based instruction.  A hybrid course is 

designed to integrate face-to-face and online activities to reinforce or complement one 

another.  The online component may be anywhere from 20-50% of the course. 

 

An online course is one in which 51% or more of the instruction and learning activities occur 

via the internet (online), either synchronous or asynchronous, and is often a combination of the 

two.  

 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 3 of 11  

An iStudy course is an independent study course for college credit.  iStudy courses are flexible 

and self-paced. They may be online and/or paper-based.  For degree-seeking students, the Dean’s 

approval is needed to apply iStudy course credit to the degree. 

 

An online educational program is any program where 51% or more of the program content is 

delivered through online courses or other electronic means. 

 

A hybrid educational program is an educational program where 25-50% of the program 

content is delivered through online courses or other electronic means. 

 

Note:  Study Abroad is not considered a DE/OC course.  

 

II. Goals of Distance Education and Off-Campus Programs Offered at the University 
of Mississippi 

 

Distance education (DE) and off-campus (OC) programs are intended to provide increased 
access to higher education for individuals who are not able to access traditional campus-based 

study.  DE/OC programs minimize or alter the barriers of time, distance, physical disability, and 

personal and professional responsibilities that may otherwise hinder students’ access to 

traditional study.  

 

It is the goal of the University that there be no difference in the academic quality and student 

learning standards between courses and programs delivered through DE technologies and those 

taught in a traditional manner.  To this end, academic standards for DE/OC courses and 

programs shall be comparable to those in the same course delivered on campus.  The academic 

department of origin shall be responsible for all accreditation and faculty standards. 

 
III. Curriculum and Instruction  

 

A variety of academic issues are raised by DE/OC courses and programs.  DE/OC programs and 

courses adhere to the same academic standards, policies, and rigor as those offered on campus.  

The courses and programs are approved through the usual university curriculum approval 

process. Selection of courses/programs to be offered is the purview of the appropriate academic 

unit, which provides faculty oversight of the program/course.  For all degree programs offered 

through DE and/or at OC locations, the programs should embody a coherent course of study that 

is compatible with the University’s mission and is based upon a field of study appropriate to 

higher education.  

 

Before any newly created course or program that involves DE delivery or delivery to an OC 

location is offered by the University, a request for such a new DE/OC course or program must 

originate in and be approved by an academic department and dean (and the Curriculum and 

Policy Committee in certain schools or the College). The approval process  

  



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 4 of 11  

then follows the typical academic workflow process.  The Graduate and/or Undergraduate 

Council reviews the academic content and faculty qualifications for the new DE/OC courses or 

programs.  The Council or Councils will exercise their authority to approve or disapprove the 

requests.  The Council of Academic Administrators reviews and approves/disapproves the 

proposed new course or program.  If a proposed course or program is approved through these 

channels, the Office of the Provost is responsible for seeking further approval from the IHL 

Board and/or informing SACSCOC when appropriate. 

 

When courses are scheduled to be offered through DE or at OC locations, the delivery method 

and/or location is indicated during the event planning (i.e., course scheduling) process.  The 

location and/or mode must be approved by the academic department chair and respective dean.  

If a department chair and dean are changing (adding or deleting) DE/OC course offerings or 

programs, they should consult with the relevant OC locations and the Division of Outreach and 

Continuing Education.  

 
IIIa.  Calendar issues:  As a general rule, courses taught at OC locations, online, or as hybrid 

courses, follow the common academic calendars.  University of Mississippi (UM) students also 

may complete online or term-based iStudy courses.  All term dates associated with University 

policies, the academic calendar, and catalog are applied. 

 

Full-year iStudy courses are available to both UM students and non-UM students.  These are 

full-year courses and are not tied to the term academic calendar. A student has one year from 

enrollment to complete a full-year iStudy course.  The minimum time for completion of an 

asynchronous course is two months.   

 
IIIb.  Academic integrity of DE/OC courses:  Maintaining the academic integrity of DE/OC 

courses is a major concern. The University’s policies regarding academic integrity apply fully to 

DE/OC courses and programs. 

 

 For courses that involve graded tests as a major component in determining a student’s grade, the 

Division of Outreach and Continuing Education will assist in the identification of test-taking 

locations and exam proctors (e.g., testing center, regional campus sites, ProctorU).  The 

University Proctored Assessment Policy and the Independent-Study Proctored Testing Policy 

outline student responsibilities for taking proctored exams.   

 

The University operates in compliance with the US Federal Higher Education Opportunity Act 

concerning the verification of student identity and the student’s right to privacy in DE.  

Additional details of our policy can be found in the University’s Policy for Student Information 

and Privacy in Online Education.  The University will verify student identity using at least one of 

these methods: individual secure login and password provided by the University of Mississippi, 

proctored assessments, other emerging technologies and practices shown to be effective in 

verifying student identification, and pedagogical and related practices that are effective in 

verifying student identity.  Faculty are taught best practices for student authentication and must 

implement at least one student identification technique.  Faculty are encouraged to use 

Blackboard, which requires a secure login and password for each student to access course 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 5 of 11  

materials and submit assignments.  Students will be notified at the time of registration/enrollment 

of any fees associated with verification of student identity.  Students are responsible for paying 

proctor fees required by some testing services. 

 

Online students are subject to the same attendance policies and procedures as traditional 

students.  Student attendance in online courses is further defined and outlined in the University’s 

Attendance Policy for Online Education. Attendance is defined as active participation in the 

course as described in the individual course syllabus.  

 

Accurate headcount enrollment reports for courses at OC locations, for online courses, and for 

iStudy courses are maintained by the Office of Institutional Research, Effectiveness, and 

Planning. 
 

IIIc.  Amount and level of credit:  The University of Mississippi employs sound and acceptable 

practices for determining the amount and level of credit awarded and justifies the use of a unit 

other than a semester credit hour by explaining its equivalency. 

 

IIId.  Residence credit versus transfer credit:  DE/OC courses offered by the University and taken 

by students at OC locations are considered to be resident credit.  Online and iStudy courses are 

also considered to be resident credit.  

 

Courses taken by DE and offered by another regionally accredited institution (e.g., 

correspondence or internet-based courses offered by another accredited institution) are 

considered to be transfer credit, and the pertinent rules apply.  An exception to this is the case in 

which a DE course has been approved to be offered by the Mississippi IHL in a collaborative, 

cooperative, or dual manner by more than one state institution.   

 

IIIe.  Transcripts and notation for DE/OC courses:  Transcripts for University students 

indicate year-long iStudy courses. Online courses, term-based iStudy courses, and courses 

taken at OC locations have no special notation on transcripts. 

 

IIIf.  It is the policy of the University that academic support and learning support services must 
be appropriate and specifically related to the DE/OC courses and programs offered.  These 

services are coordinated through the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education. 

 

IV. Institutional Effectiveness and Assessment   
 

Academic programs that are delivered through DE/OC are subject to the same type of assessment 

procedures as other programs, including the assessment of student learning outcomes, student 

retention, and student evaluation.  The Division of Outreach and Continuing Education manages 

a process for online course and program review.  Students enrolled in DE/OC courses are 

provided the opportunity to participate in the course and instructor evaluation process, similar to 

the main campus process.  The OC locations also assess the effectiveness and efficiency of 

delivery, the availability of academic and student support services, and student access to 

faculty. 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 6 of 11  

 

 

 
V. Fiscal Issues 

 

Va. Tuition and fees:  The Division of Outreach and Continuing Education, in collaboration 

with the Office of the Provost and the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance, 

recommends tuition rates, which must be approved by the IHL Board.  Tuition rates may 

vary based on the method of delivery and the program of study.  There are online course 

fees associated with online courses.  Non-residents are charged a non-resident fee when 

taking online courses and term-based iStudy courses. Non-residents are not charged non-

resident fees when taking year-long iStudy courses.  Non-residents are not charged non-

resident fees when participating in particular on-line academic programs.  It is also 

important to note that financial aid policies regarding Cost of Attendance estimates, 

awarding, and disbursement of aid can be impacted by the type of course.  Term-based 

online courses are typically treated like traditional courses for purposes of financial aid, but 

special rules apply for iStudy and online degree programs. Scholarships may or may not 

cover all of the fees.  
 

Vb. FTE credits:  According to IHL Policy, all FTE credits for DE/OC courses shall reside 

with the institution where students are enrolled, and credit hours generated in DE/OC 

courses/programs may be included in the institution’s instruction budget base.  Off-campus 

locations may have a separate budget and allocation from the state. 

 

VI. External Factors 

 

VIa. Marketing and assessing course/program demand:  Determining the demand for courses 

and programs is a duty of academic departments, schools, and the Division of Outreach and 

Continuing Education.  Appropriately advertising courses and programs is the duty of the 

Division of Outreach and Continuing Education in conjunction with departments. 

Advertising, recruiting, and admissions information must adequately and accurately represent 

the DE/OC programs, requirements, and services available. 
 

VIb. Accreditation:  Reporting changes in DE/OC course/program offerings to SACSCOC and 

the IHL Board is the duty of the Office of the Provost.  The academic department, dean of the 

school, director of the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education, and the Provost are 

jointly responsible for assuring that accreditation criteria for both regional and disciplinary 

agencies are  met.  The Guidelines for Identifying Substantive Changes explain the steps and 

responsibilities for reporting changes to SACSCOC. 

 

VIc. State-wide DE activities:  The University’s DE activities must adhere to the IHL 

Board’s Distance Learning Policy. 

 

VId. Courses developed by faculty for electronic offering, through oversight by the Office of 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 7 of 11  

Online Design and eLearning within the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education, are 

considered to be the intellectual property of the creator.  The University retains the right to the 

Fair Use of the materials (see below). 

  



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 8 of 11  

VII. Faculty Issues 

 

VIIa.  Faculty qualifications and training:  A faculty member offering a DE/OC course must be 

qualified to do so. Assigned faculty for DE/OC courses will have comparable expertise, 

experience, and rank as faculty assigned to face-to-face courses.  To offer an undergraduate 

course, the faculty instructor must have a masters degree in the teaching discipline.  To offer a 

graduate course, the faculty instructor must have a terminal degree in the teaching discipline. In 

exceptional cases, other relevant experiences may be substituted for the advanced degree. 

 

Before being compensated for teaching a DE/OC course, the instructor must submit an official 

transcript of his or her terminal degree to the Department of Human Resources.  For faculty 

teaching graduate courses via DE/OC, a resume demonstrating expertise in the subject matter 

must be submitted to and evaluated by the chair of the department in which the course is 

taught.  The Dean of the Graduate School must approve membership in the Graduate Faculty.  

The department chair is responsible for ensuring that the instructor has submitted his or her 

transcript and resume. 

 

Before an instructor can be added as the instructor of record for a web-based DE course, she/he 
must be endorsed by the Office of Online Design and eLearning within the Division of 

Outreach and Continuing Education.  To be endorsed, instructors must obtain approval to teach 

online from their department chair and complete the eLearning Teaching Course.  Additional 

information about instructor training for online courses can be found in the Division of 

Outreach and Continuing Education’s Online Policy and Procedure Manual. 

 

The Division of Outreach and Continuing Education provides development opportunities for 
faculty to increase their awareness of DE methodologies and improve their instructional skills.  

The University provides adequate equipment, software, and communications access to support 

faculty-student interactions.  Faculty are responsible for informing students about technical skill 

prerequisites and required hardware, software, and supplemental materials necessary for course 

participation in each syllabus.   

 

VIIb.  Teaching assignments; “in-load” versus “off-load”:  Whether a course to be taught by a 

faculty instructor is “in-load” or “off-load” determines whether extra compensation can be 

earned.  This determination is made by the department chair, academic dean, and Division of 

Outreach and Continuing Education.  Ordinarily, DE/OC courses offered through the Division 

of Outreach and Continuing Education are considered to be “off-load” assignments for Oxford-

based faculty.  However, if a faculty member is hired with the understanding that he or she will 

teach courses, whether by DE or traditional mode to students at off-campus sites or online, 

teaching assignments will ordinarily be considered “in-load,” even if the courses are 

administered by the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education.  Online courses offered by a 

faculty member as an alternate way to deliver a course to students on campus would most likely 

be considered in-load.  
 

  



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 9 of 11  

VIIc.  Faculty compensation for teaching a DE course:  The Division of Outreach and 

Continuing Education, with approval by the Provost, will establish compensation levels for 

faculty, temporary faculty, and graduate instructors involved in the delivery of DE/OC courses.  

This is outlined in the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education Online Policy and 

Procedure Manual. 

  

VIId.  Faculty participating in DE courses offered by other institutions:  If a faculty member 

offers a DE course in collaboration with another Mississippi institution, with the Division of 

Outreach and Continuing Education being the facilitator, the faculty member will be eligible for 

additional compensation according to standard policies of the Division of Outreach and 

Continuing Education.  A full-time faculty member may not be employed by another 

educational institution or agency for the purpose of offering a credit-bearing course during the 

time when the faculty member is employed by the University, unless approved by the Provost.  

 

VIIe.  Faculty training in the development of DE delivery technologies:  When DE is used, 

staff in the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education are responsible for providing 

technical assistance and any training in the use of the equipment.  For internet-based DE courses, 

resources of Academic Computing, including the equipment in the Faculty Technology 

Development Center, are available to faculty to enable them to develop the educational 

materials. 

 

VIII. Ownership of Educational Materials 
 

When faculty create technology-based instructional materials, the University’s Copyright Policy 

applies.  Except in cases of specific assignments to create electronic instructional materials and 

cases of substantial use of University resources in the creation of such materials, a faculty 

instructor will own the copyright to the intellectual property.  The University, however, reserves 

the right to claim Fair Use of such electronic instructional materials for its intended instructional 

purpose.  If funds or release time is provided to a faculty member to develop technology-based 

course materials, it is important to prepare a written memorandum, signed by both the faculty 

member and the appropriate administrative unit, to clearly explain issues related to ownership and 

intended use of the course materials. 

 

IX. Learning and Library Resources  
 

The Division of Outreach and Continuing Education is primarily responsible for maintaining and 

operating DE rooms on the Oxford campus and at the Booneville, DeSoto, Grenada, and Tupelo 

locations.  The Division of Outreach and Continuing Education will be responsible for providing 

adequate, accessible, internet-connected computer labs and facilities at the OC sites for students 

enrolled in OC courses through the Division of Outreach and Continuing Education.  The Office 

of Information Technology will assist in providing adequate internet access support at these 

sites.  Academic Computing will support Blackboard or other course management programs and 

will provide assistance to students in using these technologies.  

 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 10 of 11  

  



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 11 of 11  

On-line library services are available to OC students.  The Division of Outreach and Continuing 

Education and the J. D. Williams Library will work together to provide delivery of library 

materials to OC students.  Working within its fiscal restraints, the J. D. Williams Library is 

responsible for maintaining an adequate set of on-line reference materials for the classes 

delivered off campus.  

 

X. Student Services and Policies 

 

Appropriate student services, including academic advising, financial aid services, registration 

assistance, and proctoring of exams, will be coordinated by the Division of Outreach and 

Continuing Education for students at OC locations or engaged in DE courses or programs 

offered through the University.  Students have access to a range of student services, including 

procedures to resolve complaints, disability services, and career services. 

 

All University academic, privacy, and conduct policies apply to students enrolled in 

DE/OC courses and programs.  The  Policy for Student Information and Privacy in 

Online Education ensures that the University operates in compliance with federal 

and state laws, including FERPA.  Information about Student Privacy Rights, 

FERPA, and the University’s processes for complying with its provisions are 

published in the student handbook.   

 

 

 


