
Page 1 of 2 
 

The University of Mississippi 
 

Appeal of a Graduate Comprehensive Examination 
 
The University of Mississippi awards graduate degrees only to those students who 
demonstrate to the graduate faculty a high level of academic competence achieved 
through intelligence, scholarship, and industry. The determination of fitness for a 
particular degree rests solely upon the judgment of the graduate faculty. The 
comprehensive examination, required of every doctoral student and many Master’s 
students, is an important measure of academic competence.  
 
Every department offering a graduate degree has the authority to establish a limit on the 
number of times a student may sit for comprehensive examinations and on the time that 
must elapse before a failed examination can be retaken. 
 
If a graduate student believes that the results of his or her comprehensive examinations 
were based on prejudice, discrimination, arbitrary or capricious action, or other reasons 
not related to academic and professional evaluation, the following appeal procedure may 
be pursued. In all cases of complaint, the student will have the burden of proof with 
respect to all allegations in the complaint. If the student fails to pursue any step in the 
procedure within the time allowed, the disposition of the case made in the last previous 
step shall be final. Retention of all correspondence and records related to the appeal is the 
responsibility of The Graduate School. A complete statement of the procedure can be 
found in the M-Book. The summary of the process that follows is provided as 
introductory information. Students considering an appeal should carefully review the 
official policy of the University as printed in the M-Book. 

 
 Step One: Within 5 days of receiving notification of failure, the student 

may appeal, in writing, to the chair of the department. Consulting with the 
exam coordinator, the chair will attempt to resolve the appeal within 10 
class days dating from the receipt of the written appeal. The chair must 
then inform the student, in writing, of the results. 

 Step Two: If the appeal is not resolved, a student may submit a written 
appeal to the Dean of The Graduate School within 5 class days of the 
chair’s denial. If clear and convincing evidence suggests that the 
committee was biased in its initial decision, the Dean may assign a newly 
constituted committee to administer a second examination. The Dean will 
deliver his decision, in writing, to the student, the department chair, and 
the Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs. 

 Step Three:  Either the student, the department chair, or a majority of the 
original examining committee may appeal the Dean’s decision. The appeal 
must be made, in writing, to the Vice Chancellor of Academic Affairs 
within 5 class days of the Dean’s decision. All previous decisions will be 
stayed pending the outcome of this final appeal. Using all available 
resources, the Vice Chancellor will make a final determination which will 
be communicated, in writing, to the student, the department chair, and the 
Dean of The Graduate School. 



Page 2 of 2 
 

 
 


