
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 3 

Tritium Bioassay Protocol 
 
Summary/Purpose:  The Tritium Bioassay Protocol Policy details procedures and requirements 
to document and analyze potential exposures when operations involve specific amounts of 
Tritiated Materials. 

Tritium Bioassay Protocol  

Approved Users requesting to work with hydrogen-3 (tritium) in milliCurie or greater quantities, 
as well as other personnel in the immediate area, must take special care to prevent the release of 
tritium to the environment and to prevent its accidental ingestion or inhalation. 

All personnel working within the approved lab must first submit a preliminary background 
bioassay and an individual's urine must be evaluated for tritium content, no earlier than 24 hours 
and no later than 72 hours, after the use or potential exposure to any tritium levels meeting or 
exceeding those given in Table 1.1.  
 

This document outlines the steps to complete an accurate bioassay for tritium intake. 

   
When is a Bioassay Required? 
Table 1.1 A tritium (H-3) bioassay is required, when any of the activity levels or concentrations 
given in the table below are met or exceeded. 

Processes 

HTO (tritiated
water and 
forms other 
than those in 
the right-hand 
column)  

HT or T2 
Gas(contained in  
sealed process 
vessels) 

Nucleotide 
Precursors 

HTO (mixed 
with more 
than10 kg of 
inert H2O or 
other inert 
substances) 

In open room or bench, 
(with possible escape of 
tritium from process 
vessels) 

0.1 Curies 
(3.7 GBq) 

100 Curies 
(3700 GBq) 

0.01Curies 
(370 MBq)  

0.01Curies 
(370 MBq) 

Carried out within a fume 
hood of adequate design, 
face velocity, and 
performance reliability 
(With possible escape of 
tritium) 

1 Curie 
(37 GBq) 

1000 Curies 
(37,000 GBq) 

0.1Curies(3.7 
GBq) 

0.1Curies 
(3.7 GBq) 

Carried out within 
gloveboxes, (ordinarily 
closed, but with possible 

10 Curies  
(370 GBq) 

10,000 Curies  
(370 TBq) 

1 Curie  
(37 GBq) 

1 Curie  
(37 GBq) 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 3 

release of tritium from 
process and occasional 
exposure to contaminated 
box and box leakage) 

   
How much Tritium is allowed to be present in my body? 
The Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) by ingestion or inhalation of tritium (H-3) is 3 x 10E9 Bq 
(~80 mCi) of Tritiated water. (Reference: ICRP 30) 
   
Table 1.2 Uptake limit concentration of hydrogen-3 in urine. 

Criteria Limit

Weekly Limit for Whole Body Uptake 2 x 10-3 µCi / ml 

Permit Holder Investigation Level 6 x 10-4 µCi / ml 

Radiation Safety Notification Level 2 x 10-4 µCi / ml 

General Precautions  

 All procedures involving milliCurie quantities of tritium (where the tritium compound is 
or could become volatile) must be conducted in a properly operating chemical fume 
hood. 

o This includes: 
o Opening of packages; 
o Dilution of stock solutions; and 
o Chemical procedures. 

* Individuals handling tritium compounds shall wear a lab coat and protective gloves.  

How do I perform a Tritium Bioassay?  

 Each individual requiring a bioassay shall collect, handle, and count their own samples. 
 If an LSC is not available, you may submit a sample and a partially completed report to 

Laboratory Services.  
 This shall be done by collecting all of the urine in a single urination-void, withdrawing a 

1-10 ml sample (5 ml preferred) and discarding the remainder. 

Sample Preparation  

 No specific sample preparation is required. 
 Low potassium glass or plastic vials should be used to minimize background counts. 
 An adequate amount of scintillation cocktail should be added and the sample should be 

shaken well. 
 The sample vials should be allowed to dark adapt in the scintillation counter for one hour 

prior to counting to minimize fluorescence. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 3 

Why can’t I use a Geiger counter? 

 Portable survey instruments are inappropriate for monitoring the weak (18.6 keV max.) 
beta particle emitted by hydrogen-3. 

 A liquid scintillation counter is adequate for counting contamination wipes and bioassay 
samples. This counter should be calibrated on an annual basis using National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) traceable standards. 

How do I calculate the tritium concentration? 

 
Formula for Determining Concentration  
The concentration of tritium in the sample in units of µCi / ml can be calculated using the 
following formula:  
Concentration = [Cs - Cb ]/ [ ( 2.22 x106 ) E V ]  
where: Cs = Gross sample counts per minute  
Cb = Background counts per minute  
E = Counting efficiency for tritium  
V = Volume of sample  
2.22x106 = DPM per µCi 
Formula for Determining Minimum Detectable Activity (MDA)  
The minimum detectable activity for the counter in units of µCi / ml can be calculated using the 
following formula:  
MDA = [2.71 + 4.65(Rb T)1/2 ] / [ ( 2.22 x106 ) E V T ]  
where: Rb = Background count rate  
T = Counting time  
E = Counting efficiency for tritium  
V = Volume of sample  
2.22x106 = DPM per µCi  
* The calculated MDA must be lower than the limits on uptake or the effluent limits or the 
counting procedure is not valid. 
Records Retention Use the Tritium Bioassay Worksheet (DHS-28) to comply with records 
retention requirements.  
The original copy of Form DHS-28 must be submitted to Laboratory Services.  

Using Program Forms and Worksheets  
The forms and worksheets used with his document provide the basis for an individual to 
document the surveys and assessments performed.  
All of the worksheets describe the policy that must be met for radiation safety surveys. 

Form DHS-28 includes the minimum amount of information necessary to provide traceability 
and repeatability of the measurements, if needed.  


