
 
  page 1 of 1 

The University of Mississippi 
 

Honors 
 
Honor Roll Requirements $ Undergraduate students who earn a semester GPA of 
3.50-3.74 will be listed on the Dean=s Honor Roll; those who earn a semester GPA of 
3.75-4.00 will be listed on the Chancellor=s Honor Roll. To be eligible for honor roll 
designation, a student must have completed at least 12 ABCDF-graded hours for the 
semester and may not be on academic probation during the semester. 
 
Graduation with Honors $ For excellent scholarship, The University of Mississippi 
awards bachelor=s degrees CUM LAUDE, MAGNA CUM LAUDE, and SUMMA CUM 
LAUDE. 
 
General Requirements $ To graduate with honors, a student must have the 
recommendation of the faculty, and must never have undergone disciplinary suspension, 
dismissal, or expulsion. Graduation honors are based on a student=s cumulative GPA on all 
college work attempted. However, courses numbered below 100, grades which have been 
removed under the forgiveness policy, and grades earned before Academic Restart are not 
included in calculating the GPA for honors. At least one-half of the number of semester 
hours of work required for the degree (e.g., 62 for a 124 hour degree program) must be 
completed at The University of Mississippi. The required GPA must be attained on all 
work attempted in residence at The University of Mississippi separately considered, as 
well as on all college work attempted both at the University and at other institutions, 
including independent study (correspondence or Internet-based) courses taken, regardless 
of whether such work has been accepted for transfer credit at the University. 
 
Cum Laude $ To be eligible for a degree CUM LAUDE, a student must have a 
grade-point average of 3.50 or above but below 3.75 on all college work attempted. 
Magna Cum Laude $ To be eligible for a degree MAGNA CUM LAUDE, a student must 
have a grade-point average of 3.75 or above but below 3.90 on all college work attempted. 
 
Summa Cum Laude $ To be eligible for a degree SUMMA CUM LAUDE, a student 
must have a grade-point average of 3.90 or above on all college work attempted. 
 
Other Academic Honors $ For descriptions of academic honor societies, and awards for 
specific academic achievements, see the Academic Honors section of the Academic 
Program chapter. 
 
 


