
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Employment of Foreign Nationals 
 
Summary/Purpose:  Employment at the University of Mississippi is subject to verification of an 
applicant’s eligibility for employment as required by immigration laws. 

1. Employment at the University of Mississippi is subject to verification of an applicant’s 
eligibility for employment as required by immigration laws. Applicants for employment at 
the University of Mississippi may be asked whether they will be able to provide evidence of 
legal permission to work in the U.S.  

2. Offers of employment will be contingent upon the ability to obtain appropriate work            
authorization in a timely manner.  

3.   All non-U.S. citizens are required to submit a copy of their permanent resident approval,  
immigrant visa or evidence of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service or Exchange Visitor 
Program authorization to work.  

 
4.   The University of Mississippi has a J-1 Exchange Visitor Program which is used to facilitate 

cultural exchange. J-1 status is a temporary visa category and holders of this status should 
have no intent to immigrate to the U.S. The use of the J-1 program is limited to non-tenure 
track appointments. The maximum length of employment for J-1 holders varies based upon 
the J-1 category used. The Office of International Programs works with the hiring unit to 
determine the appropriate category. Extensions beyond the initial authorization period are 
sometimes possible but will require timely completion of the OIP extension request.   

 
5.   Employees holding F-1 status may be encouraged to apply for F-1 practical training benefits 

for initial work authorization. Standard Optional Practical Training allows for 12 months of 
employment during which time, the hiring unit may choose to sponsor the employee for a 
visa status such as H-1b. The University of Mississippi is an e-verify employer so those 
whose OPT was based on an eligible STEM field may apply for an additional 17 month 
STEM OPT extension.  

6.   New employees or those who may be employed beyond the period of practical training 
may request sponsorship for an H visa. Applications for H visas will be prepared by the 
Office of International Programs and signed by the Director of Human Resources. The 
application process should be initiated by the employee's department five (5) to six (6) 
months prior to the expiration of practical training or the intended start date of employment. 
H-1 status may be granted for a three-year period and renewed for an additional three years. 
Departments are required to pay the filing fee.  

7.   Employees hired for tenure-track positions may request that the University apply on their 
behalf for U.S. permanent resident status. In special cases, the University may consider 
sponsoring non-tenure positions for permanent resident status. The request of employees to 
be sponsored by the University of Mississippi will be presented to the Personnel Committee 
for recommendation and to the Chancellor for approval. Applications for labor certification 
and immigrant status may only be prepared by university designated outside counsel.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

 

8.   Employees holding TN status who wish to extend their status without leaving the country, 
should go to the Office of International Programs three (3) months before the TN expiration    
date.  

9. HR continues to verify employment eligibility in the same manner as mandated by the 
federal government since November 1986 as outlined above.  In addition, effective July 1, 
2008, the University participates in the federal E-Verify program administered by the 
Department of Homeland Security.   The University uses the E-verify program to confirm 
work eligibility status for all new employees.  Participation in this program is mandatory per 
SB 2988, also known as the “Mississippi Employment Protection Act” (MEPA).   

 

 


