
The University of Mississippi 

 

VISITATION AND OVERNIGHT GUESTS 

 

Summary/Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to define the expectations for guest visitation in 

residential facilities. It also discusses the hours guests are permitted to visit, the process that allows for 

residents to request overnight guests, and the circumstances in which guests are permitted to stay 

overnight.  

 

Visitation Hours  

 

Any guest to student housing must be registered by the resident host and escorted at all times while in the 

building. A guest is defined as any individual who is not assigned to live in the community they are 

visiting or does not have university-assigned access to the community or section of the community. 

Guests must provide a University of Mississippi or other picture I.D. to the community desk assistant 

when checking in. False identification will be reported to the University Police Department for 

appropriate action. A resident may not have more than two registered guests at any time.  

 

All guests should follow the visitation hours set forth by student housing. Maximum visitation hours for 

any residence hall are Sunday through Thursday 9 a.m. to midnight and 9 a.m. to 2 a.m. on Friday and 

Saturday.  

 

The sign-in procedures do not apply to residents residing in apartment-style communities. Residents in 

apartment-style communities are responsible for the actions of any guests they bring to their apartment 

and must remain with their guests at all times. Visitation hours are applicable. 

 

PROCEDURE  

 

Sign-In/Sign-Out  

• The resident host must meet their guest at the door   

• At the front desk, the student housing staff member will record the guest's name, time of check-in 

and room number of the resident host 

• The guest must provide a photo I.D. to the community desk assistant before being signed-in 

• The guest will receive a visitor badge that must be in the possession of the guest for the duration 

of the visit    

• The guest must remain with the resident host at all times; at no time is a guest permitted to remain 

in the room or hall without the resident host; the resident host is responsible for the actions and 

behavior of their guest and the guest is expected to abide by all policies as set forth by student 

housing   

• When the guest leaves the hall, the resident host must sign the guest out; at that point, the guest 

will return the visitor badge received at check-in 

• A resident host must register their guest each time they have a visitor, even if the same guest 

visits more than one time each day 

 



Overnight Guests in the Residential Facilities 

 

Residents are permitted to have two overnight registered guests. An overnight guest is defined as an 

individual staying past visitation hours in the room of the resident host and who is of the same gender of 

the assigned community or section of the community where the resident host resides. Residents may host 

overnight guests who are:   

• University of Mississippi students and 16 years of age or older (7 days/week) OR   

• Visiting high school students (proof required) and 16 years of age or older (Friday and Saturday 

only) OR   

• Over the age of 18 and not enrolled at the university (Friday and Saturday only)  

 

Guests may not stay longer than three nights in any given two-week period. A person may not be an 

overnight guest of more than one resident per two week period. Residents should receive their roommate's 

permission prior to hosting an overnight guest. The guest’s use of a roommate’s belongings (including but 

not limited to beds, towels, and food) must be approved by the roommate. Overnight guests are registered 

through the front desk of each residential facility.  

 

PROCEDURE  

 

Students who wish to host overnight guests must follow this process:   

• Resident host must fill out an overnight guest request form at least 48 hours before an overnight 

guest will arrive 

• The resident host must provide all the information requested of the overnight guest 

• Overnight guest forms will go to the Graduate Community Director or Community Coordinator 

of each residential community to be approved or denied 

• The resident host will then follow the proper protocol for checking in their approved guest every 

time they enter and leave the building 


