
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 1 
 

Transfer Credit 

Evaluation of Transfer Credits • When a transfer student enrolls at the university, all transfer 

course work is evaluated and accepted work is recorded, without changes in grades, as part of the 

student’s permanent academic record. 

 

The dean of the college or school to which the applicant is admitted determines which transfer 

credits will apply to the degree program. Students ordinarily receive no transfer credit for 

courses designed specifically for technical and vocational career programs. The status of a 

student’s transfer credits will be re-evaluated whenever the student changes his or her degree 

program. 

 

A minimum GPA of 2.00 must be earned on all course work applied toward a bachelor’s degree, 

including a student’s accepted transfer and resident credits. To graduate, students also must have 

a minimum 2.00 GPA on all college course work attempted, as well as on all course work taken 

in residence at the University of Mississippi. 

 

The limit on the acceptance of credit from a junior or community college is one-half the 

total requirements for graduation in a given curriculum. 

 

Transfer of Nontraditional Credits • Transfer of credits earned in a nontraditional manner, 

such as credit by examination or for military experience, is determined on the same basis and by 

the same criteria as if the student had sought such credit originally at the University of 

Mississippi and without regard to the amount of credit awarded by the institution from which the 

student is transferring. In any case, the University of Mississippi does not transfer or award 

credit on the basis of ACT scores or the Achievement Tests of the College Board. 

 

Courses Taken by a University of Mississippi Student at Another Institution • University of 

Mississippi students may take courses at other institutions. In order to guarantee that the credit 

will transfer and apply to the student’s degree program, the student must obtain written approval 

from his or her academic dean before enrolling in the course at another institution. Prior approval 

protects students by determining if and how credits earned elsewhere may satisfy degree 

requirements. Students who do not receive prior approval risk not being awarded transfer credit 

if the courses do not equate to UM courses, do not satisfy degree requirements, are not accredited 

with regional and/or professional accrediting bodies, or other UM rule conflicts. 


