
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 3 

Fair Labor Standards Act - Compensatory Leave - Overtime 

Summary/Purpose:  The University is covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions 

of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), as amended. Minimum wage, how to use and maintain 

the Departmental Time Record, and how performing additional work for another department is 

regulated are explained. The general procedures are given for earning Compensatory Leave 

when a non-exempt employee works overtime.   

Minimum Wage 

The minimum wage paid to University employees is $10.75 per hour. Student employees of the 

University must be paid at least the federal minimum wage rate.   

Overtime Pay 

The FLSA does not limit the number of hours that an employee can work, but simply requires 

overtime be paid to qualifying employees for any hours worked over forty (40) in a standard 

workweek at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) times the employee’s regular hourly rate of pay. 

The University’s standard workweek begins at 12:01 a.m. on Monday and runs through midnight 

on Sunday. To ensure consistent time and attendance reporting, time for employees paid on an 
hourly basis should be recorded in quarter of an hour (.25) increments (7 minutes or less is rounded 

down and 8 minutes or more is rounded up).       

Any hours worked over forty (40) in a standard workweek will include holidays, as defined by 

the Official Holidays policy (HRO.PC.400.060), but will not include Major Medical and 

Personal Leave, Jury Duty, or Administrative Leave. The University will count authorized 

enrollment in coursework (attending lecture or lab) by an employee during working hours as 

hours worked and will not deduct this time from hours worked in the standard workweek. 

Employees may be required to work overtime when requested by the employing department. All 

non-exempt, or overtime eligible, employees must have prior notice and approval from his/her 

supervisor before any overtime work is performed. Supervisors should provide employees with 

as much advanced notice as possible and should assign and distribute overtime among all eligible 

employees. Please note that under the FLSA, overtime work performed by a non-exempt 

employee, whether approved by the supervisor or not, must be compensated as overtime. If an 

employee works overtime without permission, the department is still obligated to compensate the 

employee at an overtime rate. The employee may be subject to disciplinary action up to and 

including termination for failing to adhere to policy.   

Occasionally full-time University employees with one department will be asked to perform 

additional work for another University department. Since all funds expended through the 

University are subject to the overtime regulations, this practice is not allowed without explicit 

approval as it may cause overtime to be paid to the employee involved.   

Under the FSLA, certain positions are considered exempt from the overtime requirement. The 

Department of Human Resources determines which positions meet the exemption standards of 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 3 

the Act. Exempt employees are expected to work the hours required to successfully perform the 

duties of his/her job and do not qualify for overtime compensation set forth by the FLSA. 

Compensatory Leave 

The FLSA allows flexibility for public employees regarding overtime compensation. The Act 

authorizes a public agency to provide compensatory time off in lieu of monetary overtime 

compensation, at a rate not less than one and one-half (1.5) hours of compensatory time for each 

hour of overtime worked. Compensatory Leave is the University’s preferred means of overtime 

compensation, however each department has the discretion to determine its employee’s means of 

overtime compensation; either compensatory leave or overtime pay. 

An employee and his/her supervisor must arrive at an agreement or understanding that 

compensatory time will be granted in lieu of monetary compensation prior to the performance of 

overtime work. This agreement is not required to be in writing, but a record of the compensatory 

time must be kept via the University’s payroll system. 

An employee who has accrued Compensatory Leave and requests use of the time must be 

permitted to use the time off within a reasonable period after making the request if it does not 

unduly disrupt the operations of the department. Compensatory Leave must be earned before it 

can be used and must be used prior to the use of accrued Personal Leave.   

The maximum amount of Compensatory Leave that an employee may accrue is 240 hours. Once 

an employee has reached the maximum accrual amount of Compensatory Leave, he/she must be 

compensated at the employee’s overtime rate of pay for any hours worked over forty (40) in a 

regular workweek. 

If an employee transfers to another department within the University or changes from a non-

exempt to an exempt position, the employee must either use or be paid for all accrued 

compensatory time before the change in position occurs. Additionally, the employee’s transfer 

must occur at the beginning of a payroll period since an employee may not be an exempt and 

non-exempt employee during the same pay period.   

Upon termination, employees must be paid for unused Compensatory Leave. The rate of pay will 

be the final regular rate received by the employee, or an average of the employee’s regular rate 

for the last three years of employment, whichever is greater.   

Recordkeeping Requirements 

Hours worked and leave taken by non-exempt employees must be recorded as described in the 

Departmental Time Record Policy. This record must be maintained on all non-exempt employees 

and signed by the employee and department head or supervisor upon completion. 

Forms UM4/HR12 must be retained in the department office for a minimum period of seven (7) 

years. The department copy is the official record of the University and must be readily available 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 3 

for audit from state or federal agencies. Student employees are also covered by these regulations 

therefore time records must be kept on them.   

 


