
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 5 

Privacy	  in	  the	  Electronic	  Environment	  

Summary/Purpose	  	  

This policy provides general principles that help to define the expectations of privacy with regard 
to electronic information at the University of Mississippi (UM).   

I.	  Preliminary	  Observations	  

The University of Mississippi (UM) affirms that the mutual trust and freedom of thought and 
expression essential to the academic mission of a university rest on an expectation of privacy, 
and that the privacy of those who work, study, teach, and conduct research in a university setting 
will be respected. UM recognizes that as faculty, staff and students create, use and store more 
information in electronic form, there is growing concern that information the user or creator 
considers private may be more vulnerable to invasion than information stored in more traditional 
media. This policy highlights some general principles that should help to define the expectations 
of privacy of those in the UM community. While no document addressing the fluid issue of 
technology can be exhaustive or inflexibly dictate outcomes in all circumstances, this policy 
attempts to articulate current practices and provide guidance, so that individuals may make 
informed and appropriate decisions concerning their various interactions in the electronic 
environment. 

Before addressing these issues, it should also be noted that in carrying out their operations, 
various UM departments accumulate information about members of its community, e.g., for 
purposes of payroll, employment or enrollment. Data are also created, though not necessarily 
compiled or retained on a personally identifiable basis, as an incident to the use of technology, 
e.g., the charging of purchases on Ole Miss Express cards or the borrowing of library books. UM 
does not condone disclosure or release of such personal information stored or transmitted 
through UM systems, except for legitimate purposes as outlined in this policy.  It is the 
responsibility of all UM offices that manage electronic information to safeguard this information 
from improper disclosure.  This involves communicating with employees, including student 
workers, about this and related policies and training them in the proper handling of personal 
information as is described in the Information Confidentiality/Security Policy. It is never 
acceptable to store confidential data such as grades, social security numbers, private 
correspondence, classified research, etc. on externally hosted systems, including cloud-based 
storage systems, without a contract that is fully vetted for compliance with UM policies.  

Those responsible for maintaining UM's computers and electronic networks have an important 
and special responsibility to recognize when they may be dealing with sensitive or private 
information. They may access such information without the user's consent and without obtaining 
higher level approval, but only when necessary to fulfill their official responsibilities, and they 
are expected to carry out their duties in ways that are not unreasonably intrusive. They will be 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 5 

subject to disciplinary action if they misuse their access to personally identifiable data or to 
individuals' personal files, email and voice mail or otherwise knowingly act in ways counter to 
UM policies and applicable laws. 

Finally, this policy should be understood in light of the many other UM policies and laws that 
bear on individuals' rights to privacy and the institution's responsibilities with respect to 
information in its possession about individuals. Examples of applicable laws include the Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (the "Buckley Amendment"), the Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act of 1986, and medical records regulations promulgated under the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. Examples of applicable UM 
policies include the IT Appropriate Use Policy and the Information Confidentiality/Security 
Policy. 

II.	  	  Policy	  on	  Information	  Created,	  Stored	  or	  Transmitted	  Through	  
University	  Electronic	  Media	  

A. In General 

UM provides collaboration tools, computers, computer and email accounts, networks and 
telephone systems to faculty members, staff and students for the purpose of furthering UM's 
academic mission and conducting university business. While incidental and occasional personal 
use of such systems, including email, and voice mail, is permissible, personal communications 
and files transmitted over or stored on UM systems are not treated differently from business 
communications; there can be no guarantee that such personal communications will remain 
private or confidential (see Appendix 1). 

As is the case for information in non-electronic form stored in UM facilities, UM's need for 
information will be met in most situations by simply asking the author or custodian for it. UM 
reserves the right, consistent with this policy, to access, review and release electronic 
information that is transmitted over or stored in university systems or facilities. When questions 
arise about such access, review or release of information, UM commits to treat electronic 
information no differently from non-electronic information. As with paper information, it is often 
the case by custom or rule that electronic files are shared and properly accessible by multiple 
parties in office settings. Where that is the case, the special provisions for access and notification 
outlined here need not be followed. In other cases, properly authorized UM officials including 
the Chief Information Officer and the IT Security Coordinator may access email, voice mail or 
other UM accounts without the consent of the assigned user when there is a reasonable basis to 
believe that such action: 

1. Is necessary to comply with legal requirements or process, or  
2. May yield information necessary for the investigation of a suspected violation of law or 

regulations, or of a suspected serious infraction of UM policy (for example alleged 
research misconduct, plagiarism or harassment), or  

3. Is needed to maintain the integrity of UM computing systems, or  
4. May yield information needed to deal with an emergency, or  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 5 

5. In the case of staff, will yield information that is needed for the ordinary business of the 
university to proceed.  

Except as may otherwise be dictated by legal requirements, individuals will be notified of access 
to, or disclosure of, the contents of their email, voice mail or their accounts as soon as 
practicable. In cases where such notification might jeopardize an ongoing investigation of 
suspected wrongdoing it may be delayed until the conclusion of the investigation. The 
investigating entity, whether authorized through internal auditing, the IT Security Coordinator, 
the Chief Information Officer or others as appointed by the Chancellor, is responsible for 
maintaining an official record of all electronic data searches for a period of one year.  A copy of 
the records will be provided to the office of the University Attorney upon request. All questions 
regarding investigations shall be directed through the University Attorney’s office.  

B. Faculty 

UM has the utmost respect for the freedom of thought and expression that are at the core of the 
academic mission. Whenever possible, therefore, UM will resolve any doubts about the need to 
access a UM computer or other systems in favor of a faculty member's privacy interest. 
Computer files, email and voice mail created, stored, transmitted or received by faculty will be 
afforded the same level of privacy as the contents of their offices.  Section 25-65-17 of the 
Mississippi Code states that "internal audit staff shall have access to all 
personnel and any records, data and other information of the university, 
community/junior college or state agency deemed necessary to carry out 

assigned duties."  Except as may otherwise be dictated by legal requirements, the procedures 
outlined in that policy will be followed with respect to a faculty member's computer files, email 
or voice mail in connection with other investigations or proceedings. 

C. Staff 

It is generally not UM policy to access staff members' electronically stored information. As 
noted above, UM's need for information will normally be met by asking an employee for it. 
Properly authorized university officials, including supervisors acting with the consent of their 
management, may, however, access, review and release the contents of staff computer files, 
email or voice mail transmitted over or stored on UM systems when, for example, an employee 
is absent or has left UM and the information is not available elsewhere, or in other situations in 
which it is necessary if the ordinary business of UM is to proceed. In more complicated 
situations--where, for example, a supervisor believes university resources are being misused--he 
or she should consult with senior administrators, the Office of Human Resources, or the Office 
of the University Attorney. 

D. Students 

Students are provided email and computer accounts for use primarily in connection with their 
academic activities. While UM does not generally monitor or access the contents of a student's 
email or computer accounts, it reserves the right to do so. However, access to and disclosure of a 
student's email messages and the contents of his or her computer accounts may only be 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 5 

authorized by any one of the Dean of Students or his/her designate, the Vice Chancellor for 
Student Affairs, the Chief Information Officer, or the IT Security Coordinator, in consultation 
with the Office of the University Attorney.  

E. Multiple Affiliation 

Some individuals have multiple affiliations (e.g., students employed by the UM). When the need 
for access to information arises from a particular status, the provisions above for that status will 
be applied. In other cases, the provisions for the individual's primary status will be applied. 

III.	  Violations	  of	  this	  Policy	  

Members of the UM community who believe that this policy has been violated with respect to 
their privacy should attempt initially to resolve the issue within their unit or department, if 
necessary with the mediation of the leadership of their representative assembly. Others who 
become aware of violations of this policy should report them to the IT Security Coordinator, 
Office of the University Attorney, Office of Human Resources or the Office of Audit and 
Compliance. All University offices that substantiate such violations should report them to the IT 
Security Coordinator, who will monitor them for repeat instances and patterns. Those who 
violate this policy may be subject to disciplinary procedures, consistent with those outlined in the 
Appropriate Use Policy and the Information Confidentiality/Security Policy, up to and including 
dismissal. 

 

Appendix 1: Special Note on Email Privacy 

Email is not appropriate for communicating confidential information.   Further, it is not possible 
to assure the privacy of email correspondence.  There are a number of ways that plain text email 
may be disclosed to individuals other than the addressee, including: 

• Recipient's address is mistyped; message is sent to someone else.  
• Recipient forwards email to someone else.  
• Intruders break into email system and read/disclose messages.  
• Despite owner's belief that s/he deleted it, email continues to exist on computer hard 

drive or a copy is archived on tape backup; disclosure of such copies may be required in 
connection with judicial or administrative proceedings or government investigations.  

• Email is observed as it travels over public networks and the Internet.  
• Some virus variants will randomly send existing email messages to numerous users 

within an address book. 

Please be aware that “Secure Document Exchange” is available myOleMiss (my.olemiss.edu) 
and can be used as an alternative to email to exchange sensitive documents using a secure Web 
interface.  Likewise, UM has contracted with Box for file storage in the cloud. UM Box may be 
used to store certain classes of confidential information as defined in the Information 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 5 

Confidentiality/Security Policy. See http://www.olemiss.edu/helpdesk/faq.php?cat=49 for more 
information.  


