
Page 1 of  4

The University of Mississippi

Requirements for Masters and Specialists  Degrees

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL HIGHER DEGREES
Degrees higher than the baccalaureate are granted at The University of Mississippi because of
special attainments achieved by degree candidates. Prospective students should understand clearly
that a graduate degree is not awarded upon the basis of a collection of course credits, or the
passing of certain prescribed examinations, or the submission of a thesis or dissertation. In other
words, the student cannot expect to receive a higher degree because of successfully completing
the individual parts of the degree program. Course schedules, examinations, and other
requirements explained in this catalog are to be regarded as minimal; and any student may be
required to satisfy whatever additional requirements academic advisers deem appropriate. 

To receive a higher degree from The University of Mississippi, the student must demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the graduate faculty of the department, school, or college of the student and to
the faculty of the University that the student has attained through intelligence, scholarship,
industry, and personal qualities the high level of professional and academic competence that the
faculty of each department expects of a person holding the degree being sought. The
determination of fitness to qualify for the degree rests solely upon the estimate that the faculty
makes of the student’s right to the degree. (See also “Operational Procedures” section).

The requirements stated below are basic for all master’s degrees. Additional departmental
requirements may be found preceding the lists of courses offered in the various departments.

Requirements for the Master’s ! In addition to the above “General Requirements for all Higher
Degrees” and those requirements listed below, additional program requirements may be found in
the description of individual graduate degree programs in the Academic Structure.

Semester Hours ! A minimum of 30 semester hours of graduate credit is required. For degree
programs in which the thesis is required or included, 24 semester hours of course work are
required in addition to a minimum of 6 semester hours thesis credit. Graduate students in a
master’s degree program must complete a minimum of 18 hours of formal classroom lecture
courses; that is, courses that require regular attendance, study assignments, final examinations,
and quality grades, and that are not designated or conducted as workshops, group study, directed
study, directed readings, field study, practicum, internships, etc. No more than 6 hours of Z
graded courses may be applied toward the degree program, and a minimum of 24 hours must be
taken in courses other than internships and practicums.

Final Examination ! Except for students enrolled in a program that has a comparable
culminating experience and has received approval of the Graduate Council, every candidate for a
master’s degree must pass a final written or oral examination administered by a committee
appointed by the dean of the Graduate School and recommended by the chair of the department
to which the student was admitted. The oral examination shall cover the candidate’s graduate
courses, the general background of the field of study, and thesis (if the thesis is required). The
oral examination may be taken only after the student has satisfied the foreign language



Page 2 of  4

requirement (if any) and the thesis (when required) is in final form (that is, ready for submission to
the graduate dean except for corrections required by the oral examining committee at the oral
examination). The dean of the Graduate School will not schedule oral examinations during the
regular University examination periods at the end of enrollment periods or between semesters.
Final oral or written examinations for master’s degrees should be administered no earlier than
midterm of the semester in which the candidate is enrolled in the final courses, excluding thesis
hours, required for the degree. A department or division may require supplementary oral or
written examinations and may require additional course work of candidates whose oral
examinations are unsatisfactory. However, the course work will not replace the requirement that
candidates successfully complete a final oral or written examination.

Major and Minor Fields ! As a rule, requirements at the master’s level preclude the designation
of a minor area. In special instances, with the approval of the major department and the dean of
the Graduate School, the candidate may plan a program that includes 6 to 12 hours in one area or
6 hours in each of two areas. A concentration of less than 6 hours will not be considered a minor.

Foreign Language Requirement ! The foreign language requirement is determined by each
department or school.

Time Limit ! All work applying to a master’s degree must be completed within a six-year time
period. All students whose work has been interrupted by involuntary service in the armed forces
are allowed six years in addition to the time spent in the armed services. This exception does not
apply to career military personnel. Grades received for courses taken for master’s degrees that do
not fall within the time limit for completion of all degree requirements will not be used in
determining the overall grade-point average.

Transfer of Credit ! See Transfer of Graduate Credit From Another Institution.

Thesis ! Except for the nonthesis option programs in art, classics, communicative disorders,
economics, education, engineering science, history, journalism, mathematics, modern languages,
philosophy, physics, sociology, and Southern studies, a thesis is required for all candidates for the
degree of Master of Arts and Master of Science. In programs requiring a thesis, candidates must
register for 6 semester hours of thesis. A student who has obtained 6 semester hours of thesis
credit without completing the thesis, and who has completed all course work, must enroll for 3
semester hours of thesis or course work each subsequent semester in order to obtain library and
parking permits, student housing, etc. For summer graduates, enrollment may be in either first or
second summer term, but an enrollment during the intersession will not fulfill this requirement. If
the degree is not awarded at the end of the semester or summer term, as anticipated, another
registration for 3 semester hours is required in the semester in which the degree is granted.

Regulations governing the style, format, paper, abstract and other matters may be found in A
Manual of Theses and Dissertations available in the Graduate School Office. After the oral
examination has been accepted, the student must present to the Graduate School two unbound



Page 3 of  4

copies of the thesis. The copies may be prepared photographically; however, the copies must be
clear, legible, on the proper type paper, and must meet the standards required for microfilming. A
copy of the abstract and the thesis binding fee receipt must accompany the copies of the thesis.

MASTER OF EDUCATION
The Master of Education degree is offered in the areas of counselor education, educational
leadership K-12, elementary education, and secondary education.  Specific requirements for the
degree are given by the departments in the “Programs and Courses of Instruction” chapter in this
catalog.

DESIGNATED MASTER’S DEGREES

The requirements for the following designated master's degrees are found in the catalog

MASTER OF ACCOUNTANCY

MASTER OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

MASTER OF MUSIC

MASTER OF TAXATION

MASTER OF FINE ARTS

Requirements ! The Master of Fine Arts degree is offered in the areas of art and creative writing*.
The minimum requirements for the M.F.A. in art and theatre are (a) two academic years of residency,
(b) 54 semester hours in the subject matter field, and (c) a thesis project of 6 semester hours. Up to
30 hours beyond the bachelor’s degree may be waived by the department on the basis of previous
graduate work completed in the subject field. Specific requirements for the degree in each area are
given by departments in the “Programs and Courses of Instruction” chapter in this catalog. The last
30 hours of this degree must meet the time limit requirement  for the completion of master’s degrees.

*See Department of English section for minimum requirements.

SPECIALIST DEGREES

Requirements ! Requirements for the specialist degree will be found in the “Programs and Courses
of Instruction” chapter of this catalog. Candidates for the Specialist degree must pass a final oral
examination. Specialist degrees are offered in curriculum and instruction (elementary education,
secondary education, and special education), educational leadership, and counselor education.

Time Limit ! Applicable to all Specialist degree programs, however, is the requirement that
graduate students pursuing Specialist degrees that require 36 hours or less of course work must



Page 4 of  4

complete the degree within six years. The time limit is to be computed from the date of enrollment
in the first course that is counted towards fulfillment of the requirements of the degree.


	Page 1
	Page 2
	Page 3
	Page 4

