
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Radioactive Material Lab Security 

 
Summary/Purpose:  The Policy on Radioactive Material Laboratories Security details the 
minimum discipline procedures for failure to comply with the security requirements for areas 
that use or store Radioactive Materials or Radiation Generating Devices. 
 

Radioactive Material Lab Security 

 The Radiation Safety Committee enacted procedures for disciplining individuals 
responsible for leaving lab doors open or unlocked, when unoccupied. These procedures 
are designed to promote compliance with State, Federal and University regulations 
regarding Radioactive Materials Laboratory Security. 

 All Authorized Individuals were instructed in Lab security requirements, in detail, during 
recent retraining sessions. 

 
Radioactive Material Lab Security Disciplinary Actions  

 A warning ticket will be placed on the lab door whenever a lab is found unsecured or 
unlocked and unoccupied. 

1st 
offense:  

Notify the Individual charged, Lab Supervisor, Department 
Chair, Dean, Vice Chancellor for 
Research and all the members of the Radiation Safety Committee 
of the person’s ID (when known),  
the lab location, date and time and responsible supervisor. 

2nd 
offense:  

Enact a loss of individual key privileges for 2 months and 
completion of materials training. 

3rd 
offense:  

Enact a loss of individual key privileges for 6 months. 

 The offense counter will be reset during retraining each calendar year for every 
Authorized User. 

 The individual in violation will be able to submit a written appeal to the RSO within a 
period of 10 days after notification of the violation. This appeal will be submitted to the 
Radiation Safety Committee for final action. Individuals can request a formal hearing if 
they desire. 

 Any violations outside of the scope of these procedures will require the responsible 
individual to meet with the Radiation Safety Committee for possible disciplinary action. 

 


