
 

 

The University of Mississippi 
 
 

Wireless Networks 
 

Summary/Purpose:  In an effort to provide highly reliable, secure, and reasonably performing 
wireless network service to all campus constituents, the University of Mississippi (UM) has 
established a wireless network approval process by which new implementations are proposed 
and then reviewed for technical merit and general suitability.  This policy describes the process 
for gaining approval to set up and operate departmental wireless networks. 

 
OBJECTIVES 

 
• To assist departments desiring to implement wireless technologies with the planning 

process, e.g., to choose wireless networking equipment that is compatible with the 
established campus network, to properly size the wireless subnet for consistent coverage, 
and to plan for ongoing support. 

• To deliver a uniform and high-level quality of service to all campus users, especially 
those who participate in wireless networking from more than one location on campus. 

• To coordinate the support to end users of wireless technologies, especially between the IT 
Helpdesk, the IT Technical Services division and the organization implementing the 
wireless subnet. 

• To ensure that all components of the campus wireless infrastructure comply with 
centrally-managed security protocols including user account management, i.e., to reduce 
the possibility of having sensitive data compromised through inherently insecure wireless 
networks. 

• To ensure that additions to the campus wireless infrastructure employ hardware and 
software that is approved by the Office of Information Technology for proper function of 
the campus-wide network, to coordinate procurement, and to manage frequencies and 
coverage in a way that promotes effective shared use and reduces unwanted interference. 

• To prioritize potential uses of wireless technologies, giving favor to those that best 
support overall institutional goals and objectives, e.g., to enhance learning. 

 
PROCESS 

 
The Office of Information Technology (IT) is charged with providing a stable and secure campus 
network to support the mission of the University and therefore has the authority and 
responsibility to specify technical requirements for devices connecting to it. This includes 
providing leadership in the management of shared network resources, such as setting security 
standards and disconnecting noncompliant wireless subnets when they have the potential for 
interfering with the proper operation of the campus-wide network. 

 
Before embarking on the implementation of wireless technologies, departments must submit a 
completed proposal form (next) to the Chief Information Officer. A committee with 
representation from the Provost’s Office and IT will review the proposal and approve or deny the 
request.  Limited funding for wireless projects may be available for use in academic areas based 
on the priority assigned by the Provost's Office. 



 

 

The University of Mississippi 
 
 

WIRELESS NETWORK PROPOSAL FORM 
This proposal is being submitted by:  (individual) 
Requesting Department:   
Today’s Date:   

Purpose and Anticipated Benefits: 
What part of campus will be covered by this implementation, who will benefit and in what way, why is 
wireless a good choice? 

Timeframe for Implementation: 
Please provide a high-level project plan that includes the procurement phase, installation, and target go live 
date. 

Technical Plan: 
Please include number and placement of access points (with ratio of users to access points) and equipment standards. Where applicable, name the 
IT analyst(s) that you worked with to develop this plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
Security Plan:  
Please confirm that this deployment complies with all published security policies and describe how this implementation satisfies those policy 
requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Support Contact: 
How will end users receive local support if they encounter problems? 


