
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  18.0 Overawards 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for Overawards. 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

 

Policy Content: 

 

 18.0 Overaward Overview 

 18.1 Determining Student Need 

 18.2 Types of Overawards 

 18.3 Student and Institutional Responsibilities 

 18.4 Correcting Overawards 

 18.5 Ole Miss Opportunity Awards 

 18.6 Types of Aid 

 

 

Definitions and terms: 

 

 COA – Cost of Attendance 

 EFC – Expected Family Contribution 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 MTAG – Mississippi Tuition Assistance Grant 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Part 18.0 Overaward Overview  

 

A student’s financial aid package is “overawarded” when the total aid offered exceeds the 

amount for which he/she is eligible.  

 

When an overaward occurs, the financial aid database system (ProSAM) generates a 

diagnostic indicating what type of overaward (either over need or over COA). This 

diagnostic prevents all aid from disbursing, and also prevents the student from viewing 

the award notification online. Instead, the student will see a message indicating that the 

OFA is reviewing their financial aid awards.  

 

When an overaward is determined, an OFA administrator or advisor must manually 

review the student’s financial aid awards and make any necessary adjustments in order to 

resolve the status. 

 

 

Part 18.1 Determining Student Need  

 

As specified by the U.S. Department of Education, a student's need is determined by 

subtracting the EFC from the COA as shown below. The EFC is determined by the 

federal processor from data provided on the FAFSA, utilizing the methodology formula 

authorized by Congress.  
COA – EFC = Need 

 
 

Part 18.2 Types of Overawards 

 

There are four main types of overawards:   

 

1. Over need – when a student’s need-based and gift aid (scholarships, grants, and 
other resources) exceed the student’s need. 

2. Over COA – when the COA-based aid, in combination with other awards and 
resources, exceeds the COA. 

3. Federal Pell Grant/MTAG – when the Federal Pell Grant in combination with 
MTAG award exceeds the maximum Pell amount.  

4. Fee-Specific Scholarship over award – when the combination of two fee specific 
scholarships targeting the same fee exceeds the associated cost charged on the 

students bursar account. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Part 18.3 Student and Institutional Responsibilities  

 
The student is required to report all outside resources to the OFA.  These resources 
include all scholarships, loans, and/or other funding that is paid directly to the student or 
to UM on the student’s behalf.  Not reporting these resources is a violation of federal 
regulations. 
 
Institutional scholarships must all be reported to the OFA.  If any department on campus 
is aware of a student award, the entire institution is expected to have knowledge (per 
federal regulations regarding administrative capability).  
 
 

Part 18.4 Correcting Overawards  

 
 
Because students may change enrollment during the award period, or receive additional 
scholarships and/or resources at any time during the award period, and these 
supplementary resources must be added to a student’s financial aid package, overawards 
can occur at any time. As stated earlier, the OFA is required to resolve overawards.  
 
When a student’s financial aid exceeds need, the OFA must reduce the student’s need-
based aid. When a student’s financial aid exceeds the COA, the OFA must reduce the 
student’s COA-based aid. When the combination of the Federal Pell Grant and MTAG 
awards exceed the maximum Pell amount, the OFA must reduce MTAG.  
 
When a student has two or more fee-specific scholarships and the total amount of these 
awards exceeds the amount of the targeted fee, OFA must reduce the award(s) to equal 
the amount of the associated fee. 
 
If the OFA reduces any aid that is in “paid” status, a payback may be required. Paybacks 
are charged to the student’s bursar account, for which the student is responsible.  
 
 

Part 18.5 Ole Miss Opportunity Awards    

 
 
Through our Ole Miss Opportunity program, the University guarantees that eligible 

Mississippi resident students will receive financial aid support to cover the average cost 

of tuition, residence hall housing, and an allowance for meals. This program will fill the 

gap in funding after all federal, state, institutional, and private scholarships and grants 

awarded to the student have been considered.  

 

Each year the OFA will determine the amount of the Ole Miss Opportunity cap based on 

the current rates of tuition, housing, and meal plans.  If an additional scholarship or grant 

is added to put the student’s scholarship and grants total over the cap amount, the Ole 

Miss Opportunity award must be re-calculated.  



 

Part 18.6 Types of Aid  

 
The lists below indicate some of the types of aid.  Due to the hundreds of different aid 
awards, these lists are not exhaustive.  
 
Examples of need-based aid: 

 Luckyday Success 
 McKinstry Loan 
 Federal Direct Subsidized Loan 
 Federal Work-Study 
 Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (FSEOG) 
 Health Professions Loan 

 
Examples of COA-based aid: 

 All institutional Fund 10 scholarships* 
 Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan 
 Most State of Mississippi Aid Programs (i.e., MTAG) 
 Federal Direct PLUS (including Graduate PLUS) 
 Private educational loans 
 Federal TEACH Grant 
 Most UM foundation scholarships 

 
Examples of gift aid**: 

 Federal Pell Grant 
 Mississippi Eminent Scholars Grant (MESG) 

 

 
*NOTE: According to the State of Mississippi regulations, if any Education and General 
(Fund 10) funds are used to scholarship the student, the student’s financial aid package 
shall not exceed the COA.  Therefore, Fund 10 scholarships, in combination with all 
other financial aid and resources, may not exceed the student’s estimated COA.  If it does 
exceed the COA, it is subject to reduction.  
 
**NOTE: Gift aid is not typically restricted. 
 


