
 The University of Mississippi   

Page 1 of 3 
 

Graduate Faculty Policy 

Summary/Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to outline the various roles faculty may 

hold in directing graduate student research and teaching graduate courses.  It describes the 

various memberships that faculty may hold on the Graduate Faculty and the processes by 

which these memberships are awarded. 

Graduate Faculty member are those members of the University of Mississippi faculty who 

are responsible for teaching graduate courses and directing graduate student theses and 

dissertations. Faculty at the University of Mississippi can be categorized on a number of 

different parameters – faculty categories (Regular, Support, Research, and Emeritus), rank, 

and tenure status.  In general, the following descriptions apply to this policy.  (Please see 

Faculty Titles and Ranks policy (ACA.FG.100.006) for additional clarification and description of faculty 

titles and ranks.) 

Regular Faculty – Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, or Full Professor with tenure or 

on the tenure track. 

Support Faculty – Non-Tenure track faculty including Instructors/Lecturer Track; Clinical, 

Instructional, and Of Practice Faculty Track; Artist/Writers in Residence Track; Visiting 

Faculty; Acting Faculty; Adjunct Faculty; and Military Personnel Faculty. 

Research Faculty – Non-Tenure track faculty with “Research” as a prefix in front of their 

professorial level academic title. 

Graduate faculty membership guidelines and responsibilities are summarized below. All 

members of the Graduate Faculty must have a professorial level appointment in at least one 

academic degree-granting department. A Graduate Faculty member may have an 

appointment in more than one academic degree-granting department.  

Appointment to the Graduate Faculty is automatic for Regular Faculty who qualify under 

the conditions noted below. The Graduate Council must approve any exceptions. Applicants 

for exception must be nominated by their Chair and endorsed by their Dean.  

Appointment to the Graduate Faculty is not automatic for Research and professorial level 

Support Faculty.  Research and professorial level Support Faculty with appropriate 

terminal degrees and with appointments in academic departments having graduate degree 

programs may be appointed as either Associate or Teaching members of the Graduate 

Faculty.  Recommendations to appoint a member of the Research and professorial level 

Support Faculty as either a teaching or an associate member of the Graduate Faculty are 

made by the Chair and submitted to the Graduate Dean for approval.  An official transcript 

of a terminal degree and curriculum vitae must be included in the recommendation or 

previously submitted to the Office of Human Resources. 



 The University of Mississippi   

Page 2 of 3 
 

Full Membership:  

Responsibilities: teach graduate courses; direct theses and dissertations, participate on 

thesis, dissertation, and examining committees; eligible to serve on the Graduate Council if 

elected.  

Who:  Regular Faculty at Associate Professor or Professor rank who are Tenured or 

Tenure-Track and Selected Emeritus Faculty. 

Qualifications: Terminal degree from an accredited institution in a discipline appropriate 

for the participating graduate program and promotion to or appointment as a tenured or 

tenure track Associate or Full Professor. Faculty members who were Full Members of the 

Graduate Faculty and are awarded Emeritus status may continue as Full Members of the 

Graduate Faculty for three years after retirement. Three years after their retirement, these 

Emeritus Faculty Members become Associate Members of the Graduate Faculty.   

Associate Membership:  

Responsibilities: teach graduate courses; direct theses; co-direct dissertations; participate 

on thesis, dissertation, and examining committees. 

Who:  Regular Faculty at Assistant Professor rank and approved professorial level Research 

and Support Faculty. 

Qualifications:  Terminal degree in a discipline appropriate for the participating graduate 

program and appointment in a graduate degree granting program as either an Assistant 

Professor or a professorial level Research or Support Faculty member with approval from 

the Graduate Dean to serve in this capacity. 

Teaching Membership:  

Responsibilities: teach graduate courses.  

Who:  Approved professorial level Research and Support Faculty. 

Qualifications; Terminal degree in a discipline appropriate for the participating graduate 

program and appointment in a graduate degree granting program as a professorial level 

Research or Support Faculty member with approval from the Graduate Dean to serve in 

this capacity. 

Exceptions to these guidelines for Associate and Teaching memberships require approvals 

by the chair and graduate dean.   



 The University of Mississippi   

Page 3 of 3 
 

The director of a doctoral dissertation or essay must hold a terminal doctoral degree. Only 

Associate and Full members of the Graduate Faculty are eligible to vote for Graduate 

Council representatives.  

An individual’s continuing status within the Graduate Faculty may be reviewed, revoked, or 

downgraded based on approval by those in the academic channels involving the unit 

chair/director, academic line dean, and Graduate Dean.  

 

Process for Research Faculty to Obtain Approval to Direct Dissertations  

Research faculty members, who have an Associate or Full Professor title, are Associate 

Members of the Graduate Faculty and who wish to direct doctoral dissertations may 

request approval to do so using the following procedure. No special approval is required 

for Associate Members of the graduate faculty who wish to co-direct a dissertation. In 

making a request, the faculty member should provide the following information:  

1. Current curriculum vitae.  

2. Number of Master's committees served on (a) in his/her home department and (b) 

in outside departments.  

3. Number of Ph.D. committees served on (a) in his/her home department and (b) in 

outside departments.  

4. Number of Ph.D. Committees co-chaired within home department; note any 

research relevance between the proposed request and those, which were co-

directed. 

5. Information about involvement with graduate education including courses taught.  

6. Information about whether the candidate has previously held a tenured or tenure 

track position. 

7. Other information considered relevant to support this request.  

Requests for Research Faculty to serve as dissertation directors must be supported by the 

department or graduate program and the dean of the School/College. These requests will 

be reviewed by the Graduate Council who will make a recommendation to the Graduate 

Dean. The Graduate Dean will make the final determination about the request based on 

recommendations of those in the academic channel of approval. 


