
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Airline Travel 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Regulations pertaining to airline travel when on official University 

business. 

 

General Information:  House Bill 1488, effective July 1, 2002, allows University of Mississippi 

employees to utilize the State of Mississippi Travel Agency Services contract administered by 

the Office of Purchasing and Travel.  This bill allows university employees to make reservations 

for all travel arrangements, using a state contract travel agency or booking flights over the 

Internet.  A receipt (passenger receipt) and itinerary shall accompany the request for 

reimbursement.   

 

Business/First Class:  Preferred seating, business, or first class service may be authorized if at 

least one of the flight segments exceeds 6 hours.  A flight segment is defined as time in the air 

between stopovers, changing aircraft, or change of airline.  Business or first-class travel is not 

reimbursable unless approved in advance. A Waiver Request signed by the department head 

must be submitted and approved by Procurement Services prior to the trip. 

 

Booking Flights Online:  For all flights that are not booked through one of the contract travel 

agencies, the University must maintain in its files a cost comparison showing a minimum of two 

(2) fares.  If you purchase from an online source, such as Orbitz, Delta.com, or Travelocity, the 

2nd comparable quote must come from a different online source and be submitted with your 

airfare receipt attached to your travel reimbursement.  This cost comparison must show the fare 

and any issuance cost and must show a savings, and shall be submitted along with the 

employees’ Travel Reimbursement Voucher. 

 

If the employee must book a flight at a price in excess of the lowest rate on the cost comparison, 

the traveler must, prior to booking the flight, submit a Waiver Request to Procurement Services 

and include the amount of cost and the justification of using that fare on the waiver. 

 

The least expensive routing shall be used.  In calculating the difference between airfare and 

travel by personal vehicle, factor in additional lodging and meal expenses, taxi fares, parking, 

and other airport related expenses.  Delays en route that will not delay the traveler’s arrival at the 

destination by more than 3 hours actual travel time within the same day travel was begun and 

result in a substantial cost benefit to the state will be used. 

 

Airline Penalty Fares 

Airline penalty fares shall be used whenever possible. The University will pay the penalty or 

administration fee if schedules have to be changed or canceled due to business related 

circumstances. Some canceled nonrefundable tickets require that the ticket be held and used 

within the next twelve months, with a payment of an administrative fee. The ticket is in the 

employee's name and cannot be changed for another person to use. The ticket must be used for 

university business. 

 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2013/11/waiver.pdf
http://www.dfa.state.ms.us/Purchasing/StateContracts/TravelAgencyContractsList.html
http://www.dfa.state.ms.us/Purchasing/StateContracts/TravelAgencyContractsList.html
http://procurement.olemiss.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2013/11/waiver.pdf


The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

Airline Reservation Changes 

When an involuntary airline reservation change results in additional reimbursable cost 

(delayed flight requiring overnight hotel and meals), you should attach a note of explanation to 

the Travel Reimbursement Voucher. If you must make voluntary changes to your travel 

arrangements while en route, make the necessary change and attach a note of explanation to the 

Travel Reimbursement Voucher when you file for reimbursement. The University will not 

reimburse the fees resulting from the change if the change is for personal reasons. 

 

Flight Insurance:  Some of the state contract travel agencies also provide free insurance with 

tickets.  No other flight insurance will be reimbursed. 

 

Frequent Flyer Points 

Any bonus or promotional gratuity received as a result of official University travel shall be used 

to offset or reduce the cost of subsequent official University travel. Under no circumstances can 

the traveler keep a bonus or other promotional gratuity so earned for their own personal use nor 

shall bonuses or gratuities be used to upgrade a ticket. As sufficient mileage, earned as a result of 

state-paid travel, is accumulated, free ticket coupons will be applied for. The procedures required 

by the airlines for redemption of mileage credits should be followed. 

 

http://www.dfa.state.ms.us/Purchasing/StateContracts/TravelAgencyContractsList.html

