
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Travel Advances 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Eligibility for travel advances 

 

General 

Employees are eligible for an advance on travel that is University business related. This includes 

travel within the State of Mississippi. The advance is available 20 days before departure date. 

The maximum amount available is 100% of the estimated cost of the trip after payment of any 

Prior to Trip Expenses (registration fees, airline tickets, etc.).  Only 2 travel advances shall be 

outstanding at one time. 

 

Prior to Trip Expenses (PTE) 

PTE allow travelers to be reimbursed for lodging or public carrier ticket purchases paid prior to 

traveling.  PTE can be paid any time prior to the trip and are not subject to the 20-day prior to 

travel limit imposed for travel advances.  There is no limit on the number of PTE that can be 

outstanding for each traveler.  PTE are necessary to accommodate payments required to be made 

in advance.  Many hotels charge the first night’s lodging to the traveler at the time reservations 

are made or the traveler may utilize the internet to purchase airline tickets using their personal 

credit card.  PTE should only be incurred if it is in the best interest of the University. 

 

The traveler must obtain approval on the Travel Authorization form to receive PTE.  

Employees must note on their Travel Authorization that they wish to receive an advance. 

Appropriate documentation must be attached, such as a detailed flight itinerary showing the cost 

of the flight or detailed statement from the hotel showing their charge.  To receive PTE for 

registration fees, a copy of the completed registration form showing the fee should be attached.  

The University will not pay conference fees for entertainment, family tours, etc. Such fees are 

the personal expense of the employee.  A check or direct deposit will be issued to the employee. 

In order to receive the advance prior to the beginning date of the trip, it is imperative the 

approved travel authorization be in the Procurement Services 20 days before the start of 

the trip. An employee will not have the option of walking through the authorization and picking 

up a check. 

 

Reconciling Advances on the Travel Reimbursement Voucher 

When the travel has been completed you must file a Travel Reimbursement Voucher.  PTE must 

be included on the Travel Reimbursement Voucher. The travel clerk will first apply the 

reimbursement to the advance. If the reimbursement exceeds the amount advanced, the employee 

will receive a check for the difference. If the reimbursement does not exceed the amount 

advanced, the employee owes the difference. It is the employee’s responsibility to clear the 

advance. If the advance is not cleared within 10 days after the end of the month in which the 

travel was completed, the difference will be deducted from the employee’s next reimbursement 

or deducted from the next scheduled payroll if no other reimbursements are outstanding. 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/travel-authorization-form/
http://procurement.olemiss.edu/travel-reimbursement-forms/

