
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 

Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 
       

 

 

 

Policy Name:  Student Acceptance of Awards 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures regarding student acceptance of financial 

aid awards and their associated terms and conditions. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 HELP – Higher Education Legislative Plan 

MESG – Mississippi Eminent Scholars Grant 

MTAG – Mississippi Tuition Assistance Grant 

MyOleMiss – University of Mississippi’s student portal 

 NSLDS – National Student Loan Database System 

OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

  

 

Students must accept their award packages before aid can be disbursed.  This requirement 

is for all students regardless of the type of award being offered.  It must be done at least 

annually.   

 

To complete this requirement, students access the OFA web page located at the following 

link https://finaid.olemiss.edu/ and click on Check Award Status in MyOleMiss. From 

there, they will log on to MyOleMiss and select the appropriate academic year and time 

period.  (Summer financial aid awards are accepted separately from Fall/Spring.) 

 

The online aid package is displayed by term.  With most awards, students have the option 

to accept or decline them individually.  With loans, they can choose to decline, accept or 

reduce the amounts (NOTE: declining or reducing aid is only permitted if disbursement 

for that term has not already occurred). 

 

https://finaid.olemiss.edu/


By confirming his/her award, the student also agrees to the “Financial Aid Policies and 

Conditions of Award”, including an understanding that UM will use email as the official 

means of communication.  Students may rescind this authorization at any time by 

notifying the OFA in writing. Cancellations of this authorization are not retroactive. 

Students who prefer to conduct business using paper documents should contact the OFA 

in writing to make other arrangements. 

 

Among other items, the following topics are also included in the “Financial Aid Policies 

and Conditions of Award”:  Satisfactory Academic Progress, unofficial withdrawals, 

prior year balances, NSLDS notification, fee-specific aid restrictions, estimated aid 

explanations, refund/repayment rules, the attendance verification policy (“Go to Class”), 

and delivery of funds.   

 

This authorization also collects the student’s affirmation under penalty of perjury that, if 

required by law, they are registered for Selective Service.  This statement is required for 

receipt of any state aid (including MTAG, MESG, and HELP grants, as well as 

institutional scholarships that are funded by State of Mississippi appropriations to UM.) 

 

In addition, electronic confirmation authorizes UM to apply proceeds from his/her 

financial aid in excess of allowable charges for tuition, fees, books, room, and board to 

other charges in his/her bursar account balance. These charges may include but are not 

limited to pharmacy fees, prior year balances up to two hundred dollars, and late charges.   


