
Page 1 of 2 

 

The University of Mississippi 

 

Academic Freedom and Faculty Responsibility 
 

The standing University Committee on Academic Freedom and Faculty Responsibility will 

conduct hearings, when such are required, in cases of the dismissal or termination of tenured 

faculty, the nonrenewal of a contract for a nontenured faculty member when there is a substantial 

claim that such action violates academic freedom or equal employment rights, or the dismissal of 

a nontenured faculty member prior to the expiration of a term appointment.   

 

The initial investigation in cases mentioned above will be conducted by the Tenure and 

Promotion Appeals Committee. If after that investigation, the faculty member involved requests 

a full hearing, that hearing will be conducted by the Committee on Academic Freedom and 

Faculty Responsibility. 

 

The committee shall be composed of tenured professorial faculty members. The chair of the 

committee shall be selected at its first meeting. Each school or college shall be represented with 

one member with the exception of the College of Liberal Arts which shall have three members.  

The library faculty shall also have one member. For each position available, an election should 

be completed and the name should be submitted by January 1 of each year to the Provost/Vice 

Chancellor for Academic Affairs. The name submitted shall be determined by election conducted 

by and under the auspices of the Senate of the Faculty among the tenured faculty of each college, 

school, or library. Members shall serve three-year terms which will be staggered as follows: 

 
College of Liberal Arts Group III  
(History, Political Science, Psychology, Economics, Sociology and Anthropology) 
School of Pharmacy  
School of Applied Sciences 
Library Faculty 

 
College of Liberal Arts Group I 
(Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Philosophy and Religion, Physics and Astronomy) 
School of Accountancy  
School of Education 
School of Engineering 

 
College of Liberal Arts Group II 
(Art, Classics, English, Modern Languages, Music, Theatre Arts) 
School of Law 
School of Business Administration 
School of Journalism and New Media 

 
Individuals serving as department chairs and up are not eligible for service on the committee.  
Individuals may not serve on a Dean's Advisory Committee, the Tenure and Promotion Review 
Committee, the Tenure and Promotion Appeals Committee, or the Academic Freedom and 
Faculty Responsibility Committee concurrently. Individuals from the same department as the 
appellant shall recuse themselves from the consideration of that appeal.   



Page 2 of 2 

 

 
In addition to its responsibilities as a hearing body, this committee is empowered to initiate and 
consider matters pertaining to academic freedom and faculty responsibility at The University of 
Mississippi Oxford campus.   
 
The Chair of this committee shall serve on ad hoc faculty grievance committees. If for any 
reason the Chair is not able to serve, the Provost will appoint, with the consent of the Chair of 
the Faculty Senate, another person from the Academic Freedom and Faculty Responsibility 
Committee 
 


