
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Laboratory Safety Training Requirements 
 
Summary/Purpose:  The Laboratory Safety Training Requirements detail procedures and 
requirements to receive training and authorization to use Hazardous Chemicals, Biological 
Materials, Radiological Materials or Radiation Generating Devices. 
 

TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 

 

 The following safety training requirements apply to faculty, staff and graduate students 
working with biological, chemical, radiological materials or ionizing radiation producing 
devices on the Oxford Campus, as well as visiting investigators working with these 
materials under the supervision of trained University personnel on the campus. 

 These training requirements will also apply to undergraduate students when they are 
working in these areas in other than a regularly scheduled University course.  

 Use of any of the materials/devices listed below requires the signing of the appropriate 
"Safety Agreement" form. 

 You must present Proper Identification (Student ID, Social Security Number, 
Passport / Visa) at the beginning of the training sessions. 

 Please call Laboratory Services to schedule a date and time for your training session(s).  
 Training classes start promptly at the Scheduled Time. If you are late, you will have to 

reschedule. 

 

GENERAL BIOLOGICAL SAFETY TRAINING: All faculty, staff or graduate students 
working with biological materials are required to take the biological safety training program and 
pass a written quiz on biological safety. Annual retraining is not required. Time required for the 
training is approximately 1.5 hours  

BIOSAFETY FOR MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL: All University maintenance personnel 
who are required to enter areas where personnel use or store biohazardous materials or biological 
waste are required to attend a specialized biological safety training course and pass a written quiz 
on biological safety awareness. Annual retraining is not required for continued authorization. 
Time required for the training is approximately 1 hour.  

HUMAN PATHOGENS, DNA AND HUMAN PRODUCTS SAFETY TRAINING: All 
University personnel and all students working with human pathogens; human blood, blood 
products or human body fluids; and recombinant DNA are required to have special biological 
training and written authorization prior to starting any work. A pre-requisite to this training is 
completion of the General Biological Safety Training. Annual retraining is not required for 
continued authorization. Time required for the training is approximately 1 hour.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

GENERAL CHEMICAL SAFETY TRAINING: All faculty, staff and graduate students 
working with chemicals on the Oxford campus are required to take the chemical safety training 
program and to pass a written examination on chemical safety. Annual retraining is not required. 
A special safety training program is required for Maintenance Personnel. Time required for the 
training is approximately 3 hours.  

CARCINOGENIC SAFETY TRAINING: All University personnel and all students are 
required to have special safety training in the handling and use of carcinogenic materials and 
written authorization prior to starting any work with carcinogenic compounds. A laboratory with 
a Class II or better Fume Hood is required for the handling of carcinogenic materials. A pre-
requisite to this training is completion of the General Chemical Safety Training. Application to 
use carcinogens is made through the Laboratory Services. Annual retraining is not required for 
continued authorization. Training is part of the Chemical Safety Training.  

RADIOLOGICAL SAFETY TRAINING--MATERIALS: All University personnel including 
all students working with, or in areas that use or store, radioactive material are required to have 
completed the Radiation Safety Training program for Materials including passing a written 
examination and have obtained written authorization prior to working with, or in areas that 
house, radioactive isotopes. Authorization of personnel to work in University laboratories where 
personnel use or store Radiological Materials is contingent upon their direct supervisors and 
Department Heads receiving and maintaining similar authorization. A pre-requisite to this 
training is completion of the General Chemical Safety Training program and Carcinogen 
approval. Annual retraining is required for continued authorization. Annual retesting is not 
required. Time required for the training is approximately 3 hours.  

RADIOLOGICAL SAFETY TRAINING--GENERATING DEVICES: All University 
personnel and all students working with, or in areas that use or store, ionizing radiation 
generating equipment are required to have completed the radiation safety training program 
including passing the written examination and have obtained written authorization prior to 
starting any work with, or in areas that house, ionizing radiation generating devices. 
Authorization of personnel to work in University laboratories where personnel use or store 
Radiation Generating Devices is contingent upon their direct supervisors and Department Heads 
receiving and maintaining similar authorization. Annual retraining is required for continued 
authorization. Annual retesting is not required. Time required for the training is approximately 2 
hours.  

Any questions concerning these safety training requirements should be referred to the 
Laboratory Services at 662-915-5433.  

 


