
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 3 

 

Travel Reimbursement 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Section 25-3-41, Mississippi Code of 1972, establishes guidelines for 

travel reimbursement of employees of the State of Mississippi, including the University of 

Mississippi.  It also provides that the Fiscal Management Board shall publish rules and 

regulations that accomplish savings for all expenses authorized under the section. 

 

Penalty for Fraudulent Claim 

In accordance with the Mississippi Code of 1972, Section 25-3-45, anyone who knowingly and 

willfully violates any provisions of the law, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty for 

conviction is loss of job or position held, a fine of not more than $250.00, and civil liability for 

the full amount of the expenses illegally received, allowed, or approved. The person receiving 

the reimbursement is also liable whether the violation was willful or not. 

 

A university employee should not claim expenses for another university employee. 

 

Approvals 

The traveler’s department head should approve the completed reimbursement form. Travel 

reimbursement forms for department heads/chairs must be signed/approved by their 

dean/administrative head. Travel reimbursement forms for senior management (i.e., vice 

chancellors) and department heads with a direct reporting line to the Chancellor, must be 

signed/approved by the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance, or his designee.  Travel 

reimbursement forms for the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance must be 

signed/approved by the Chancellor, or his designee.  The signatory officer for the account that 

will fund the travel must also sign the travel reimbursement form. 

  

Personal Expenses 

The University will not pay expenses resulting from unofficial stopovers, side trips, personal 

telephone charges, or any other items of a personal nature. 

 

General  

A Travel Reimbursement Voucher must be completed, approved by the traveler’s department 

head, and sent to the Office of Procurement Services with the following items attached, if 

applicable: 

 

 Required receipts 
 

 A program brochure from the sponsor of a conference, seminar, or meeting when special 
lodging or airline rates are provided. 

 

 International Travel receipts must be converted to US dollars on the Travel Reimbursement 
Voucher and be accompanied by the conversion rate used. 

 

 Expense claims must be itemized under Section A, B, C, D, E, F and G of the Travel 
Reimbursement Voucher. 

 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/travel-reimbursement-forms/


The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 3 

 Travel Reimbursement Vouchers must be signed by the employee and cannot be completed 
or signed in pencil.  

 

 If the information on the Travel Reimbursement Voucher does not correspond to the 
approved Travel Authorization (if required), the travel clerk will return the Travel 

Reimbursement Voucher for clarification. 

 

 If the Travel Reimbursement Voucher is not completed correctly, it will be returned 
requesting the needed information. 

 

Expenses That Require Receipts 

Major expenses incurred while on official travel for the University must be documented with 

original itemized receipts.  

 

 Lodging Express Check-out receipts that do not provide a daily itemized hotel bill are not 
acceptable documentation for reimbursement. 

 

 Airplane, train and bus tickets - Itemized receipt must include departure and destination 
cities with dates. Proof of payment must be on document. 

 

 Baggage charges – Actual cost – original receipt required over $10.00 per claim 
 

 Registration fees 
 

 Car rental 
 

 Taxi or limousine service, if amount claimed exceeds $10.00 
 

 Parking or toll charges, if amount claimed exceeds $10.00 
 

 Gasoline charges 
 

 Banquet meals that cause the total daily meal reimbursement to exceed the maximum daily 
meal allowance. 

 

Expenses That Do Not Require Receipts 

 

 Meal and meal tips  
 

 Personal vehicle mileage 
 

 Baggage handling – $10.00 or less per occurrence 
 

 Telephone calls - itemized calls on hotel bills must be identified as business calls. Circle the 
call and write business next to it. Personal calls cannot be claimed on the Travel Voucher. 

 

Other Required Documentation  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 3 

A Waiver Request Form must be submitted to the Office of Procurement Services and approved 

to request a waiver from any standard travel procedures.  The following is a list of possible 

reasons a Waiver Request Form may be needed: 

 

 Requesting authority to pay an amount greater than the state contract. 
 

 Requesting authority to rent a vehicle with a cost greater than the intermediate size on state 
contract. 

 

 Requesting authority to purchase vehicle rental insurance. 
 

 Requesting authority to rent a vehicle not on state contract. 
 

 Requesting authority to pay a hotel other than the conference hotel. 
 

 Requesting authority to pay greater than the least expensive cost comparison for airline 
tickets. 

 

 Requesting authority to purchase business or first class airfare. 
 

Please refer to the Waiver Request Policy for additional information. 

 

http://procurement.olemiss.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2013/11/waiver.pdf
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=11056410

