
Page 1 of 4 

 

The University of Mississippi 

 

Policy on Promotion of Instructors and Lecturers 
 

Instructors and lecturers are non-tenureable faculty. However, the University has established a 

career ladder for the promotion of instructors and lecturers.  The policies below apply only to 

instructional faculty with a 1.00 FTE appointment. 

 

 

A. Titles B  The career ladder will comprise three levels: Instructor; Lecturer; Senior 
Lecturer.   

 

 

B. Appointment B  Minimum qualifications will be proposed by each department and 
approved by the appropriate Dean. In no case will the minimum qualifications be less than those 

established by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.  Base salaries will be 

established consistent with the qualifications.   

 

Except in extraordinary circumstances, appointment for these faculty members will be made at the 

Instructor level. In rare cases where the initial hire is at the Lecturer or Senior Lecturer level, 

formal approval by the tenured faculty in the academic unit is required, as is approval by the Chair, 

Dean, and the Provost. 

 

 

C. Rights, Privileges, and Responsibilities B Decisions regarding membership in, and 
leadership of, the professorial faculty are historical legacies of the professoriate. Consequently, 

instructors, lecturers, and senior lecturers will not participate in tenure and promotion decisions of 

the tenure-track professorial faculty, nor in the review of academic administrators. In other 

academic matters, such as curriculum design, advising, scholarship and assistantship 

recommendations, searches, etc., their roles shall be determined by each academic department, 

with the approval of the Dean.   

 

 

D. Guarantee of employment and non-renewal policy B A member of the faculty with the rank 
of Lecturer or Senior Lecturer who is not to be continued shall ordinarily be given notice of 

non-renewal not later than twelve months before the expiration of his or her appointment.   

 

The chair, in consultation with the faculty, will, when necessary, recommend that Lecturers or 

Senior Lecturers not be continued. In making such a decision, the chair will consider not only the 

credentials of the Lecturer or Senior Lecturer, but also the needs and the financial situation of the 

department. 

 

Exceptions to this termination policy may be made under extraordinary circumstances as follows: 

1. Financial exigencies as declared by the Board of Trustees;  

2. Terminations or reduction of programs, academic or administrative units as approved by 

the Board of Trustees;  



Page 2 of 4 

 

3. Malfeasance, inefficiency or contumacious conduct;  

4. Cause. 

 

 

E. Promotion From Instructor to Lecturer 

 

1. Time in rank - No instructor should be considered for promotion to Lecturer until he or she 

has served five years as a 1.0 FTE Instructor.   

 

If an instructor has experience at another institution, and presents appropriate credentials, he or she 

may be hired as an instructor with a reduction in the five-year period. Such agreements should 

parallel the procedures currently in the handbook for reducing the probationary period for tenure.  

In particular, such agreements must be made in writing at the time of hiring and must be approved 

by the tenured faculty, the chair, the dean, and the Provost. 

 

2. Procedures for promotion - Instructors will not automatically be considered for promotion 

to Lecturer after serving five years at the rank of Instructor. Only Instructors who are judged 

exceptional and recommended by the tenured faculty in the department will be considered for 

promotion to the rank of Lecturer. Note that this policy is significantly different from the 

promotion policy for professorial faculty in that a recommendation for promotion from Instructor 

to Lecturer cannot go forward unless approved by the tenured faculty.  

 

Instructors who believe that they have met the criteria for promotion, or who wish to be considered 

for promotion in the future, should discuss with the chair of the department the possibility of 

promotion. The chair will decide whether to present the Instructor=s credentials to the appropriate 
departmental faculty for consideration; the chair=s decision will be based not only on the 
qualifications of the Instructor, but, also, on the needs and the financial situation of the department. 

 

3. Teaching - Teaching effectiveness shall be the principal criterion for promotion.  

Evidence to support a record of teaching effectiveness must be systematic, comprehensive, and 

thorough. A portfolio documenting this effectiveness would generally include elements such as: 

a. All available student evaluations of courses taught during the period of review. 

b. Structured classroom observations by professorial faculty. 

c. Documents for each course, including a syllabus, copies of exams and other 

assignments, online resources if appropriate, samples of student work (A, B, and C 

work, with identification removed), and grade distributions. 

d. Copies of annual departmental reviews. 

e. Documentation of activities designed to maintain currency in the discipline and in 

pedagogy (see the criteria pertaining to scholarship). 

f. Other documents as determined by the academic department. 

 

4. Scholarship B Whereas an Instructor does not have a specific obligation to engage in 
research, such activity will be considered favorably as a part of the dossier for promotion to the 

rank of Lecturer. Evidence of active scholarship would include the publication or presentation of 



Page 3 of 4 

 

academic papers at the local, regional, or national level in either the discipline or in pedagogy.  An 

application for promotion must demonstrate that the Instructor sustains knowledge of 

developments in the discipline and in the related areas of pedagogy. 

 

5. Service B Instructors must be active in service to their students, their disciplines, their 
academic departments, and the University. Such service may be documented through participation 

in professional organizations, departmental and university committees, advising, or other 

academic support activities. 

 

6. Letters from Outside Evaluators B Letters from outside evaluators are not required for the 
promotion dossier. 

 

 

F. Promotion from Lecturer to Senior Lecturer 

 

1. Time in rank - No Lecturer should be considered for promotion to Senior Lecturer until he 

or she has served six years as a 1.0 FTE Lecturer. 

 

2. Procedures for promotion - Lecturers will not automatically be considered for promotion to 

Senior Lecturer after serving six years at the rank of Lecturer. Only Lecturers who are judged 

exceptional and recommended by the tenured faculty in the department will be considered for 

promotion to the rank of Senior Lecturer. Note that this policy is significantly different from the 

promotion policy for professorial faculty in that a recommendation for promotion from Lecturer to 

Senior Lecturer cannot go forward unless approved by the tenured faculty.  

 

Lecturers who believe that they have met the criteria for promotion, or wish to be considered for 

promotion in the future, should discuss with the chair of the department the possibility of 

promotion. The chair will decide whether to present the Lecturer=s credentials to the appropriate 
departmental faculty for consideration; the chair=s decision will be based not only on the 
qualifications of the Lecturer, but, also, on the needs and the financial situation of the department. 

 

3. Teaching - Teaching effectiveness shall be the principal criterion for promotion. Persons 

recommended for promotion to Senior Lecturer should be regarded as exemplary teachers, and 

should be prepared to assume leadership or mentoring roles for graduate instructors and junior 

members of the faculty with respect to teaching. Evidence to support a record of teaching 

effectiveness must be systematic, comprehensive, and thorough. A portfolio documenting this 

effectiveness would generally include elements such as: 

a. Student evaluations of all courses taught during the period of review. 

b. Structured classroom observations by professorial faculty. 

c. Documents for each course, including a syllabus, copies of exams and other 

assignments, online resources if appropriate, samples of student work (A, B, and C 

work, with identification removed), and grade distributions. 

d. Copies of annual departmental reviews. 

e. Documentation of activities designed to maintain currency in the discipline and in 



Page 4 of 4 

 

pedagogy (see the criteria pertaining to scholarship). 

f. Other documents as determined by the academic department. 

 

4. Scholarship B Although Lecturers do not have a specific obligation to engage in research, 
such activity will be considered favorably as a part of the dossier for promotion to Senior Lecturer.  

Evidence of active scholarship would include the publication or presentation of academic papers at 

the local, regional, or national level in either the discipline or in pedagogy. Lecturers have an 

obligation to remain informed of current scholarship in their discipline, and in the scholarship of 

teaching in higher education. Any application for promotion must demonstrate that the Lecturer 

member sustains knowledge of developments in the discipline and in the related areas of 

pedagogy, and that such knowledge is thoughtfully and effectively applied to teaching duties. 

 

5. Service B Lecturers are expected to be active in significant service to their students, their 
discipline, academic departments, and to the University. Such service may be documented through 

participation in professional organizations, departmental and university committees, advising, or 

other academic support activities. 

 

6. Letters from Outside Evaluators B Letters from outside evaluators are not required for the 
promotion dossier. 

 

 

G. Comments on Promotion Procedure  

 

The procedure established for the review of tenure and promotion dossiers for tenure-track faculty 

members provides a generally satisfactory model for the review of Instructors/Lecturers, with the 

exception that the Dean of the Graduate School will not be part of the review process. 

 

Each Dean may have an advisory committee for promotion of an Instructor/Lecturer similar to the 

advisory committee for tenure and promotion of professorial rank faculty members. This advisory 

committee may include Senior Lecturers. 

 


