
Page 1 of  1

The University of Mississippi

  Archives and Special Collections Policies

The Department of Archives and Special Collections at the University of Mississippi
asks potential patrons to read the following general rules covering on- and off-site use of
our collections. These policies have been framed primarily to conserve the physical
integrity of materials and to protect the legal, intellectual, and creative rights of copyright
holders. 

I. On-site Policies
Books, manuscripts, and other materials in the Archives and Special Collections are
maintained in closed stacks and do not circulate beyond the department. Patrons must
complete a request form before archives personnel will retrieve materials.

While conducting research, patrons may use pencil, not ink pens. Laptops are permitted,
but patrons are encouraged to bring adequately charged batteries since we cannot ensure
access to electrical outlets.

Because of the uniqueness and value of materials in Special Collections, security
measures are in place at all times. Lockers are provided for materials not required for
taking notes. Researchers are asked to sign in and out on each visit, and to sign for all
materials requested. All materials will be checked prior to the researcher's departure. 
Researchers who seek access to manuscript materials must sign a release agreeing NOT
to publish extensive quotes without the written permission of all interested parties and
assuming sole responsibility for any infringement of literary rights and copyrights. 

II. Photocopy and Photoduplication Policies
Regulations for the photocopying procedures at the Department of Archives and Special
Collections reflect our adherence to copyright laws and our commitment to preservation.
The department maintains a self-service photocopier with copies costing $.10 a page.
Books dating from the Nineteenth Century through 1940 must first be inspected by a staff
member before copying. All manuscript materials must also be inspected by a staff
member before copying. The department retains the right to refuse to make copies. 

III. Copyright Law
In the information age, intellectual property is as valuable as material property. Strict
adherence to copyright law protects the creator of original works. Copyright is a right
granted by legal statute to the author or originator of a literary or artistic production that
invests, for a specific time, the originator with the sole and exclusive privilege of
multiplying copies of the work and selling them. The United States copyright law
protects unpublished materials as well as published works. If you wish to use an
unpublished manuscript in a publication, you must determine if the work has passed into
the public domain and is no longer under copyright protection. If not in the public
domain, copyright holders must authorize any use of a potential work. 


	Page 1

