
The University of Mississippi 

Employee Transfer (Inter-University Employment) 

Summary/Purpose:  The University encourages inter-university transfers with the  

guidelines applied to employees within the probationary period and after the University 

probationary period has been successfully completed. 

 

Employees are always encouraged to consult with their present supervisor about their interest 

in transferring. 

 

The transfer from one department to another within the University has no effect on the leave 

privileges or the potential retirement benefits. 

 

Anymore hired into a permanent support staff or professional/administrative staff position will 

be required to complete six months of employment before being allowed to apply for other  

jobs on campus.    

 

Employees within the probationary period: 

All non-faculty, non-contractual employees are on probation for a minimum period of three 

to six months.  Refer to the entitled “Probationary Period” for further details regarding the 

Probationary Period. 

 

The only exceptions include: 

 

a.  An employee in the probationary period may apply for a promotional opportunity that is 
 in the best interest of the employee and the University.  A non-exempt employee may 

 apply for an exempt level position within the University.  While in the probationary  

 period, a non-exempt employee may not apply for another non-exempt position outside 

 of the department. 

 

b.  An employee may transfer within his/her current department. 
 

Employees who transfer during their probationary period must serve at least an additional 

three months in the probationary period. 

 

The current department head and the new department head of the employee must approve the 

electronic Form 3 agreeing to the transfer and the transfer effective date. 

 

Employees outside of the probationary period: 

Once an employee has successfully completed the University’s probationary period and six 

months of employment, the employee is not restricted from applying for positions and if 

offered, from transferring into a new position. 

 

The employee will not be required to serve another University probationary period.   

 

The current department head and the new department head of the employee must approve the 

electronic Form 3 agreeing to the transfer and the transfer effective date.   

 

 


