
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Directly Charging Costs to Sponsored Projects that are  
Normally Considered F&A Costs 

 

Summary/Purpose:  Certain types of costs normally treated as facilities and administration 
(F&A) costs (e.g., salaries and related benefits of administrative and clerical staff, office 
supplies, postage, local telephone, and memberships) cannot be charged directly to a sponsored 
project unless the specific activities related to the project are clearly different in type or 
significantly different in scale from the institution norm.  Such costs should be explicitly 
budgeted and justified in the proposal and approved by the sponsoring agency as part of the 
project direct cost budget. 

Awards issued prior to December 26, 2014 will follow the United States Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) Circular A‐21: Cost Principles for Educational Institutions.  Awards issued 
after this date will follow the OMB guidance at 2 CFR Part 200 Uniform Administrative 
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform 
Guidance). 
 
Section 200.413(c) of the Uniform Guidance specifies that salaries of administrative and clerical 
staff should normally be treated as indirect (F&A) costs and should not be direct charged to 
sponsored projects.  However, under certain conditions, the Uniform Guidance does provide 
criteria where the direct charging of administrative and clerical costs may occur.  Direct charging 
of these costs may be appropriate only if all of the following conditions are met: 
 

1. Administrative or clerical services are integral to a project or activity; 
2. Individuals involved can be specifically identified with the project or activity; 
3. Such costs are explicitly included in the budget or have the prior written approval of the 

Federal awarding agency; and 
4. The costs are not also recovered as indirect costs. 

 
Section 200.453 of the Uniform Guidance states in the specific case of computing devices, 
charging as direct costs is allowable for devices that are essential and allocable, but not solely 
dedicated, to the performance of a Federal award.  Principal Investigators (PI) are responsible for 
determining whether or not the device is essential and to what extent the cost of the device is 
allocable to the sponsored project.  PIs and departments should maintain documentation that 
describes how the proposed computing device meets the above requirements.  Computing 
devices may be direct charged to a project or activity under the following circumstances: 
 

1. The machines are essential and allocable to the project in that they are necessary to 
acquire, store, analyze, process, and publish data and other information electronically, 
including accessories for printing, transmitting and receiving, or storing electronic 
information. 

2. The project does not have reasonable access to other devices or equipment that can 
achieve the same purpose.  Devices may not be purchased for reasons of convenience or 
preference. 


