
The University of Mississippi 

 

ELECTION CAMPAIGNING 

 

Summary/Purpose: The Department of Student Housing recognizes that student elections are an 

important activity for our students. This policy outlines proper procedures for candidates who are 

wishing to campaign in the residential communities to ensure that the residents’ rights to a 

comfortable, safe, and secure environment is not disturbed.  

 

The Department of Student Housing, in conjunction with the Residential Housing Association (RHA) 

and the Associated Student Body (ASB), have instituted a campaigning policy for the residence halls. 

This policy is intended to provide candidates with guidelines for soliciting votes. It is also intended to 

prevent unwanted solicitation, visitation, and escort violations, as well as the posting and distributing of 

campaign materials in non-approved locations.  

 

A. The candidate, along with one other person, will be allowed to campaign in the residence halls 
only on the Wednesday and Sunday before the primary from 7-10 p.m. In the case of a runoff, a 

candidate, along with one other person, may campaign in the residence halls from 7-10 p.m. the 

Wednesday before the runoff.  

B. The resident of a particular room must give permission in order for a candidate to hang a flyer on 
that resident’s door. Further, there is to be no sliding of campaign material under doors of student 

rooms or any other type of random distribution of campaign materials.  

C. Open forums may be held in the lobby of any residence hall at any time, provided that the time 
and place are arranged and confirmed by the graduate community director.  

D. Hanging of fliers in the windows or doors of the residence halls and posting of fliers on the 
building directly or on the bulletin boards of the residence halls is prohibited.  

E. In addition to prosecution by the ASB Elections Commission, violations of the items in this 
section are subject to student judicial action and possibly the University Police.  

 

Candidates who choose to campaign in on-campus housing must follow these housing guidelines:  

 

1. Candidates and their escorts must report to the front desk and identify themselves as candidates 
for an ASB election. Either the candidate or candidate’s escort must be of the same gender as the 

building in which the candidate is campaigning.  

2. Candidates and their escorts must sign in as visitors and remain together in the building at all 
times.  

3. Candidates may go door-to-door during the assigned time period, but must officially “check out” 
at the front desk prior to 10:00 p.m.  

4. Failure to properly check out by 10:00 p.m. will result in the submission of a formal campaign 
violation report to ASB.  

5. No artificial noisemakers or amplified sound equipment will be permitted while touring the halls.  

6. Each candidate and escort must have a clearly visible name tag providing his/her full name.  
7. Campaigning on residence hall floors is not permitted outside of these established time frames.  

8. Stickers may not be placed on doors.  

 


