
 

 

The University of Mississippi 

Graduate Admission Statuses 
 

Admission to the Graduate School is determined by the Dean of the Graduate School after 

evaluation and approval of credentials and recommendation by the faculty of the academic 

discipline concerned. A baccalaureate degree is the minimum credential required for admission 

to the Graduate School. Students may apply for admission before this requirement is met but 

may not enroll as graduate students until this degree is conferred. 

 

Categories of Admission: Degree Seeking 
 

1. Full Standing Admission - Applicants who are recommended by the faculty of the academic 

area concerned and whose credentials include a baccalaureate degree from a regionally 

accredited institution, a 3.0 or equivalent grade-point average on the last 60 hours of 

undergraduate course work, and an acceptable score on the standardized test appropriate to their 

discipline, may be considered for admission in full standing to a degree program. 

 

2. Conditional Admission - Applicants who have not met requirements for full standing 

admission but whose credentials include a baccalaureate degree and appropriate standardized test 

scores and who indicate a reasonable chance for success, may be admitted in this category. Upon 

advancement to full standing admission and recommendation of the departmental chair 

concerned, credit earned while enrolled in this status may be applied to a degree program. 

Students admitted in this category must satisfy all conditions of admission by the end of their 

first term of enrollment or their status will be changed to nondegree. Except in unusual 

circumstances, students may not remain in conditional status more than one semester. 

Conditional students may not preregister for a second enrollment. 

 

3. Qualifying for Admission - Applicants whose academic qualifications are not 

sufficiently strong to warrant admission to a degree program, but who take courses that will 

strengthen their qualifications to enter graduate degree programs, will be admitted as qualifying 

students. Courses completed in this category may not be applied to a graduate degree program at 

The University of Mississippi. Students admitted in this category are not eligible to receive 

graduate assistantships. While in qualifying status, a student may take a minimum of 9 hours and 

a maximum of 18 hours. When recommending admission into this category, departments are 

required to specify up to 18 hours of undergraduate course work, and/or to specify a non-course 

requirement, to be completed satisfactorily before the student is considered for admission into a 

graduate degree program. 

 

 

Categories of Admission: Nondegree Seeking 
 

1. Nondegree I - Applicants with no intention to pursue or qualify for a graduate degree 

program and whose undergraduate grade-point average is below 2.7 will be admitted in this 

category. Enrollment is restricted to courses at the 400 level and below. 

 

2. Nondegree II - Applicants with no intention to pursue a graduate degree program and 



 

 

whose undergraduate grade-point average is 2.7 or higher will be admitted in this category. 

Students admitted in this category cannot register for thesis or dissertation hours. Enrollment is 

restricted to courses at the 600 level or below unless the student has permission from the 

department offering the course to enroll in a 700 level course. Nondegree II students who later 

apply for and are accepted in a degree program may apply a maximum of 9 hours of graduate 

work taken in this category.  

 

3. Nondegree III - International applicants who will be enrolled in a Graduate Accelerator Program 
and have a baccalaureate degree from a regionally accredited institution with an earned grade-point 

average of at least 2.5 may be admitted to this category. A student in this category may not register 

for thesis or dissertation hours. Applicants must meet the English language proficiency requirements 

established for admission to the Graduate Accelerator Program. Nondegree III students who later are 

admitted to a degree program may apply a maximum of 12 hours of courses taken in this category to 

the degree. 

 

4. Visiting - A student who wishes to enroll in graduate course work for transfer toward a 

degree at another institution may be admitted in a visiting status. A visiting student must have 

written approval of the institution to which the credit will be transferred. Credit earned as a 

visiting student at The University of Mississippi may not be applied toward a degree program at 

this institution. 


