
The University of Mississippi 

Extra and Supplemental Compensation for Faculty and Staff 
 

Summary/Purpose:  A definition of extra and supplemental compensation is given along with 
an explanation of who qualifies. Guidelines are given for using University funds to provide 
additional compensation. 

This policy applies to all full-time faculty, including tenure/tenure track, non-tenure track, 
research track, and instructional track (i.e., EEO 1 and 2), and to professional administrative staff 
(EEO 3) during their standard contract period (9 months or 12 months). This policy establishes 
general guidelines for using University funds to provide additional compensation to faculty and 
staff beyond their base salaries. Extra compensation is defined as relating to work performed that 
is beyond the duties assigned to the position. Supplemental compensation is defined as an 
augmentation due to outstanding performance of assigned duties.  

In all cases, extra or supplemental compensation must not interfere with the ability of the 
individual to carry out the duties associated with his or her base salary. This policy is based on 
the assumption that the job expectations associated with the base salary for a faculty or staff 
member have been established. This may be done through the job description, appointment letter, 
annual performance reviews, tenure and promotion guidelines, or other memoranda.  

Extra Compensation 

Extra compensation applies to duties undertaken or assigned that are beyond the ordinary duties 
of the individual. In general, these are overload situations. Examples include:  

•  A full-time faculty member who chooses to teach a course off-campus or in a mode that is 
outside the standard teaching assignment (e.g., at night, summer session, intersession, 
independent study, or Ole Miss On-Line), or on a topic outside that covered by the faculty 
member's appointment (e.g., LIBA 102). These examples do not apply in cases where the 
teaching assignments are part of the standard teaching assignment of the individual faculty 
member or a typical faculty member in the department (i.e., teaching night, weekend, on-line, or 
off-campus courses may be a standard teaching assignment in some departments).  

•  A faculty member who takes on administrative duties (e.g., chair, dean, director, etc.) May 
receive an administrative supplement for the extra duties; see the salary conversion policies 
located on the Policy Web site regarding the case of a faculty member assuming a departmental 
chair position.  

•  A faculty or staff member who takes on additional research or service activities, of a non-
recurring nature, beyond the duties associated with the base salary. (Additional research or 
service activities that are recurring in nature are considered a change in job description.)  

•  A staff member (with no assigned teaching in his or her job description) who teaches a course 
or takes on other duties outside the normal assignment. A professional staff member who takes 
on such additional work for extra compensation will be required to continue to put in full work 
week hours. A staff employee may receive extra compensation for teaching a course if the class 

Page 1 of 2 



The University of Mississippi 

is outside the normal 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. workday. For a staff employee to teach a class 
during the workday, he or she must deduct the total number of contact hours from accumulated 
leave time, with the required amount of leave time being available in order to make the teaching 
appointment.  

Extra compensation should not be more than 30% of the individual's base salary rate for any 
month. Extra compensation associated with teaching summer or intersession courses is an 
exception to this guideline, due to the accelerated nature of the activity.  

Supplemental Compensation

Supplemental compensation may apply to a variety of situations in which a faculty or 
professional staff member receives a supplement to his/her “state base” salary for performing 
within the normal range of duties associated with the position. This supplement may be 
associated with outstanding performance (i.e., teaching or research awards) and may thus be 
temporary in nature. Alternatively, the supplement may “build” the base salary of an individual 
by adding to the “state base”. Examples of the latter include endowed chair positions, in which 
external funds are added to state dollars to build the total base salary for an individual.  

Supplemental compensation (except in the situation regarding building a base salary) will be 
temporary in nature and either may be given as a lump sum (e.g., awards) or may be stretched 
over one or more semesters. Guidelines for the selection of individuals to receive supplemental 
compensation (award types) should be established and should be approved by the Provost. 
Unless the Provost has indicated otherwise, individual selections should be approved through the 
level of the Provost.  

The source of the supplemental compensation may be any type of funding under control of the 
University.  

Cases of supplemental and extra compensation, including work expectations and the approval 
steps, should be documented using Human Resources forms (e.g., e-form 11 for Research during 
Intercessions or Summer Months or e-form 40, Request for Additional Pay, for various awards or 
for extra teaching assignments).  

Relationship with OMB Circular A-21

Nine month faculty may pay themselves a maximum of 3/9 of their nine-month salary during the 
summer months from all University sources, including grants and contracts.  

A faculty or staff member who is PI on a grant or contract may not pay him/herself extra or 
supplemental compensation using the contract or grant as the source, unless this is approved by 
the funding agency as part of the proposal.  

A faculty or staff member may earn salary from a grant at greater than his or her normal monthly 
base salary if he or she performs extra duties that are across departmental lines (consistent with 
OMB Circular A-21).      

Page 2 of 2 


