
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Holiday Pay 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Information regarding holiday pay is given. Instructions on how to pay 

non-exempt employees who work nonstandard schedules is also given. 

 

Permanent full-time and part-time employees (to include probationary employees in permanent 

positions) will receive regular pay for official holidays and special holidays even though they are 

not required to work. If a month begins or ends with a holiday(s), and employees work all the 

regular workdays in that month, they will be paid for the entire month. 

 

Permanent non-exempt employees who are assigned to work by their supervisor on an official 

holiday (Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, etc.) should be paid one and one-

half times their regular rate in addition to the holiday pay, which is eight hours. However, if an 

employee should prefer time off within the holiday period, it may be granted at the option of the 

department head on an hour-for-hour basis. 

 

Permanent non-exempt employees who are assigned to work by their supervisor during an 

unscheduled University closure designated by the Chancellor (such as the Friday after 

Thanksgiving, the day following New Year's Day, etc.) should receive time off on an hour-for-

hour basis at a time convenient to the employee and the department head or department chair. 

This time off will normally be provided within two weeks but no later than six weeks after the 

end of the week in which the unscheduled closure occurred. If time off cannot be provided in the 

specified time, the employee will either be credited with compensatory time at one and one-half 

hours for each hour worked or paid at one and one-half times the regular rate in addition to 

his/her regular pay for hours worked. 

 

If a holiday falls on a normal day off for employees who work non-standard schedules ("shift 

personnel"), the employee should receive benefit of the holiday. If it is an official holiday,  

employees must be given another day off within their normal workweek, credited with 

compensatory time at one and one-half hours for each hour worked, or be paid at one and one-

half times their regular rate in addition to regular pay for hours worked. If it is an unscheduled 

University closure, time off must be awarded as provided in the third paragraph above. 

Employees working nonstandard schedules should enjoy the same number of paid holidays 

during any holiday period as those employees working standard schedules. 

 


