
The University of Mississippi 
 

Personal Leave (vacation) for Twelve-Month Employees 
 
 

Summary/Purpose:   This policy provides information regarding the accrual rate of 
personal leave (vacation) time that permanent twelve-month employees receive along 
with guidelines concerning approval of leave time, when personal leave should be taken, 
payment for terminated and retiring employees, and payment in the event of an 
employee’s death. 

 
Twelve-month  permanent  full-time  employees  and  temporary  employees  who  are 
benefits eligible may accrue Personal (vacation) Leave in increments as follows. 
Employees who work one-half time or more will earn leave credit on a pro-rata basis. 
Accumulation amounts are unlimited. 

 
Continuous Service Monthly Accrual Rate Annual Accrual Rate 
1 month to 3 years 12 hours 144 hours 
37 months to 8 years 14 hours 168 hours 
97 months to 15 years 16 hours 192 hours 
Over 15 years 18 hours 216 hours 

 
Personal (vacation) Leave may be taken at a time approved by the department head. 

 
Personal (vacation) Leave, Compensatory Leave, or Leave Without Pay must be used for 
the first eight hours of an employee’s illness or illness of a member of the employee’s 
immediate family, except for regularly schedule visits to a physician’s office or a hospital 
for the continuing treatment of a chronic disease or serious medical or mental health 
condition, as certified in advance by a physician.  For purposes of this policy, physician 
means a doctor of medicine, mental health, osteopathy, podiatry, or chiropractor. 

 
For purposes of this policy, immediate family is defined as spouse, parent, stepparent, 
sibling, child, stepchild, grandchild, grandparent, son- or daughter-in-law, father- or 
mother-in-law, or brother- or sister-in-law. 
 
Employee absences due to a work-related injury for which temporary workers’ 
compensation disability benefits are paid shall not use accrued Personal (vacation) and/or 
Major Medical (sick) Leave simultaneously with workers’ compensation benefits if the 
aggregate payments exceed one hundred percent (100%) of regular wages earned while in 
state employment at the time of injury.   Accrued Personal (vacation) and Major Medical 
(sick) Leave may be used in increments fewer than eight (8) hours per day to constitute the 
difference between the amount of temporary workers’ compensation disability benefits 
received and one hundred percent (100%) of earned wages while in state employment at 
the time of injury, as calculated by Human Resources.   
 
Any employee may donate a portion of their earned Personal (vacation) and/or Major 
Medical (sick) Leave to another employee who is suffering from a catastrophic injury or 
illness or to another employee who is caring for a member of his or her immediate family 



who is suffering from a catastrophic injury or illness, as defined in the Donated Leave 
policy.  The maximum amount of earned Personal (vacation) and/or Major Medical (sick) 
Leave that an employee may donate to a qualifying recipient may not exceed a number of 
days that would leave the donor employee with fewer than seven (7) days of Personal 
(vacation) and less than fifty percent (50%) of his or her earned Major Medical (sick) 
Leave.  Leave must be donated in twenty-four (24) hour increments.  The maximum 
amount of donated leave an employee may receive without returning to work is 720 hours.  

 
Employees may be granted a maximum of 240 hours accumulated Personal (vacation) 
Leave within the 6 month period immediately preceding termination.  This leave can be 
taken with the approval of the employee’s supervisor and may be denied if such leave 
causes  a  major  problem  in  the  workload  distribution  within  the  unit.    However, 
employees may utilize all their accumulated Personal (vacation) Leave within the last 6 
months of employment for certified medical reasons.  A number of situations may deem 
it necessary for an employee to finalize issues with the Department of Human Resources; 
therefore, individuals are normally expected to be present at their duty station on their 
last day of employment. 

 
Payment of accrued leave is permissible only upon termination of employment.  A change 
of status from twelve-month employment to nine-month employment does not constitute 
termination, and terminal payment of accrued leave will not be made at  that  time.  Any 
accrued  Personal  (vacation)  leave  for  this  type  of  employee  will continue to be 
accounted for by the University and will be paid upon termination to employees who are 
not participating in the Public Employees’ Retirement System of Mississippi (PERS).    
Employees may be paid for the unused portion of their earned Personal (vacation) Leave 
to a maximum of 240 hours; employees participating in PERS will have the remaining 
balance submitted to PERS and counted as creditable service for retirement. 

 
Employees terminating from the University may be paid for the unused portion of their 
earned Personal (vacation) Leave to a maximum of 240 hours, unless transferring to 
another state agency in Mississippi without a break in service.   Transferring employees 
will have earned Personal (vacation) and Major Medical (sick) Leave balances transferred 
to the new state agency. 

 
Should an employee die having accumulated Personal (vacation) Leave credit, the wages 
or salary for the total unused Personal (vacation) Leave time shall be paid to the person 
designated by the employee for this purpose, or in the absence of such designation, to the 
beneficiary of such employee as recorded with the Public Employees’ Retirement System 
of Mississippi. 


