
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 4 

 

 

Progressive Discipline for Non-faculty 

Summary/Purpose:  The University’s progressive discipline policy and procedures are 

designed to provide a structured corrective action process to improve and prevent a recurrence 

of undesirable employee behavior and performance issues. 

Outlined below are the steps of the University's progressive discipline policy and procedures. 

The University reserves the right to combine or skip steps depending on the facts of each 

situation and the nature of the offense. Some of the factors that will be considered are whether 

the offense is repeated despite coaching, counseling or training; the employee's work record; 

and the impact the conduct and performance issues have on the organization. 

 

If any employee is performing unsatisfactorily or exhibiting improper conduct, the supervisor 

should work with the employee in an attempt to improve his/her conduct or performance. 

Utilization of the University's Employee Assistance Program (EAP) offered through the 

University Counseling Center should be considered by the supervisor when substance abuse or 

mental or emotional stress is suspected. This Progressive Discipline Policy does not alter or 

affect the University's employment at-will policy. 

 

The following guidelines will be observed in working with employees: 

 

1. The employee should be informed of the conditions of employment and the employee's 
job duties should be reviewed as necessary. 

 

2. The University's rules and requirements of the employee should be fair. 
 

3. The University should apply the applicable rules and requirements evenly and without 
discrimination. 

 

4. The employee should be given forewarning of the possible consequences of his/her 
actions, except in cases of misconduct so serious the employee could be expected to 

know that such conduct may result in discharge. 

 

5. A record of the incident or substandard performance in which disciplinary action 
may result should be made.  Refer to the section “Process” below regarding 

documenting formal progressive discipline through a Progressive Discipline Action 

Notice in connectu, connectu.olemiss.edu.  

 

This policy does not apply to temporary employees or to employees who have not completed the 

probationary period. This policy also does not apply to the non-renewal of a contractual 

employee. 

 

 

 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 

Types of Progressive Discipline Actions (Steps): 

 

 

1. Notice - A counseling or verbal warning creates an opportunity for the immediate supervisor 
to bring attention to the existing performance, conduct or attendance issue. The supervisor 

should discuss with the employee the nature of the problem or the violation of the 

University’s policies and procedures. The supervisor is expected to clearly describe 

expectations and steps the employee must take to improve his or her performance or resolve 

the problem. 

 

Within five business days, the supervisor will prepare written documentation of the verbal 

counseling. The employee will be asked to sign this document to demonstrate his or her 

understanding of the issues and the corrective action. 

 

 

2. Formal Warning - Formal warnings are to be used for recurring or more serious deficiencies, 
or where there is a future possibility of more severe action including dismissal, or after 

notices have been unsuccessful. 

 

The written warning involves formal documentation of the performance, conduct or 

attendance issues and consequences. 

 

The immediate supervisor and an another manager or director should meet with the employee 

to review any additional incidents or information about the performance, conduct or 

attendance issues as well as any prior relevant corrective action plans. The manager will 

outline the consequences for the employee of his or her continued failure to meet performance 

or conduct expectations.  A formal warning may be referred to as a final warning. 

 

The formal warning will be completely documented by the supervisor with a copy to 

the Director of Human Resources or designee. The record should provide the details 

specified in item 1 above, if applicable. 

 

Suspensions without pay for a maximum of two days may be utilized as a form of discipline. 

The suspension must be approved by the department head and reviewed by the Director of 

Human Resources or designee. The employee is to be informed of the right to a review of the 

suspension by the vice chancellor or the vice chancellor's designee. 

 

3. Dismissal - The last and most serious step in the progressive discipline process is a 
recommendation to terminate employment. Generally, the University will try to exercise the 

progressive nature of this policy by first providing warnings, issuing a final written warning 

or suspending the employee from the workplace before proceeding to a recommendation to 

terminate employment. However, the University reserves the right to combine and skip steps 

depending on the circumstances of each situation and the nature of the offense. Furthermore, 

employees may be terminated without prior notice or disciplinary action. 

 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 

The manager’s recommendation to terminate employment must be approved by the Director 

of Human Resources or designee.  

 

Employees against whom dismissal action is taken are to be advised in writing by the 

Director of Human Resources or designee of such dismissal. 

 

 

4. Suspension, Pending Investigation - This action should be taken in cases when the infraction 
is of such serious nature (theft, willful damage to property or persons, and other similar 

infractions) that it may warrant dismissal, pending review of the facts. The suspension should 

be followed immediately by a thorough investigation of the case. The Department of Human 

Resources will be informed of all such suspensions and the circumstances surrounding such 

actions. 

 

5. Dismissal Procedure - Before an employee is dismissed, the employee must have a 
meeting with the employee's supervisor or department head. At this meeting, the supervisor 

should explain the details and reasons for the recommended dismissal. This meeting will 

constitute the first level of review in the dismissal process. 

 

Should the employee no longer be reporting to work and unavailable for a meeting, the 

employee should be notified by Certified Mail, return receipt requested, of the pending 

dismissal and offered the opportunity to meet with the supervisor or department head. 

 

Employees against whom dismissal is taken will then be advised in writing by the 

Department of Human Resources of such dismissal. This written notice may contain the 

reasons for dismissal or they may be given verbally. The reasons will be made available to 

the employee in writing if he/she so requests. If only verbal notice of the reasons is given, 

then a confidential record of this notice shall be made by the person giving such notice. 

 

The written notice of dismissal will inform the employee that he/she has a right to a review of 

his/her dismissal through the Grievance Process provided he/she makes application in writing 

to the Department of Human Resources within five workdays from receipt of the notice. In 

the event the employee is no longer reporting to work, the written notice shall be mailed, by 

Certified Mail, return receipt requested, to the employee at his/her last known address, and 

the employee will have five days after receipt of the notice to request a review. 

 

If the employee should request a review within the time allowed, the employee will be 

provided (1) the opportunity to appeal the dismissal through the Grievance Process, and (2) if 

requested, a written statement of the reasons for dismissal. The appeal will begin at the 

hearing stage of the Grievance Process. If a written request for a hearing is not received 

within the time specified, the dismissal action by the University will be final. 

 

6. Effective Date of Dismissal - The effective date of dismissal shall be the date specified in the 
written notice of termination unless such date of termination is extended by the review 

process or by the University. This date should coincide with the date of the dismissal meeting 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 4 

 

 

with the employee's supervisor or department head. 

 

7. Time Limit - When a sequence of corrective actions has been started, the sequence will be 
considered terminated 12 months after the last action initiated. If problems arise again after 

this 12-month period, a new sequence of actions shall be started. 

 

Performance and Conduct Issues Not Subject to Progressive Discipline: 

 

Behavior that is illegal is not subject to progressive discipline and may result in immediate 

termination. Such behavior may be reported to local law enforcement authorities. 

 

Similarly, theft, substance abuse, intoxication, fighting and other acts of violence at work are 

also not subject to progressive discipline and may be grounds for immediate termination. 

 

Formal Documentation Process: 

 

After the supervisor has reviewed the performance and/or incident, including discussing the 

concern(s) with the employee, the supervisor must communicate to a human resources manager to 

request access to the electronic progressive discipline action notice.   The supervisor will receive 

an email with instructions to access the online form on the University’s site, connectU, at 

connectu.olemiss.edu, within the “Performance & Engagement” tile within the “To Do” section 

(top of the page).  

 

The electronic form is made available to the supervisor and the employee for acknowledgement.  

The form will also be routed to the supervisor’s manager (next level manager) and Human 

Resources. Once received, a Human Resources representative will acknowledge receipt and the 

form will be completed.  A copy of the form is retained in each person’s “Completed” folder 

within the Performance module, accessed through the drop down menu. 

 

Related Policies: 

 

Separation from Employment 

 

Terminations 

 

https://policies.olemiss.edu/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10655837
https://policies.olemiss.edu/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10655838

