
The University of Mississippi 

Employee Conflict of Interest 

Summary/Purpose:  University of Mississippi employees have a legal and ethical responsibility 
to maintain compliance with laws regarding employee conflicts of interest.  Guidelines are given 
to determine when a conflict of interest may exist, along with where to get additional 
information, and the consequences of violating state ethics laws.

University of Mississippi employees have a legal and ethical responsibility to maintain 
University and personal compliance with State ethics and other laws regarding employee 
conflicts of interest.

Under State ethics law it is a breach of ethical standards (wrong) for an employee to use his 
position at the University to obtain any sort of financial gain for himself or a family member 
other than the employee's compensation. A conflict of interest would include but is not limited to 
an employee's participation directly or indirectly in procurement when:  

(a) The employee or any immediate member of the employee's family has a financial interest 
pertaining to the procurement;  

(b) A business organization in which the employee, or any member of the employee's immediate 
family, has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement;  

(c) Any other person, business, or organization is involved in the procurement with which an 
employee or any member of an employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an 
arrangement concerning prospective employment.  

Under some circumstances, an employee's spouse may benefit from a contract with the 
University if the employee does not have direct or indirect control over the contract.  

For further information, please consult the Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, Sections 25-4-
101 et seq., and Section 1200 of the Policies and Bylaws of the Board of Trustees for Institutions 
of Higher Learning. To assure compliance, conflict of interest language has been added to all 
University payment documents, as well as the purchase requisition (PR) and purchase order 
(PO). If you are involved in authorizing a request for, or setting up a vendor, processing a PR or 
PO, or submitting a HR Form 13 or a Request for Payment form, consider whether a conflict of 
interest might exist. If you are in doubt, please contact Procurement Services, Human Resources, 
Internal Audit, or the University Attorney's office for clarification.  

Do not hesitate to ask for additional information or a ruling if there is any doubt regarding the 
relationship of an employee or an employee's family member to the payee or payment recipient. 
At times it may seem logical or even make good business sense to allow for a compromise to this 
policy; but even a procurement that seems to serve the University's interest may nevertheless be 
illegal. If a transaction violates state ethics laws, full restitution of all funds involved may be 
required, and an employee who violates state ethics laws may also be subject to disciplinary 
action, up to and including TERMINATION, as well as CRIMINAL PROSECUTION by the 
State of Mississippi.

Page 1 of 1 


