
The University of Mississippi 

 1 

Information Confidentiality/Security 

 
Summary/Purpose:  This policy articulates an enterprise-wide commitment to 

information security and sets standards for how confidential information maintained by 

the University of Mississippi (UM) is to be protected.  The purpose of this policy is to 

ensure that UM employees at all levels, as well as contractors, understand their roles and 

responsibilities in reducing institutional risk as related to information security.  Access to 

sensitive information is subject to policies, guidelines, and procedures that are set by UM, 

the Mississippi Institutions of Higher Learning (IHL), and the Mississippi Department of 

Information Technology Services (MS-DITS), as well as federal and state laws. 

Adequately securing customer information is not only the law but also good business 

sense. Poorly managed customer data opens doors to identity theft and provides access to 

sensitive information that could result in loss to customers. 

 

Background 

 

The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) enacted Nov. 19, 1999, not only reforms the 

financial services industry but also calls for the safeguarding of customer financial 

information and describes the need for administrative, technical, and physical safeguards 

for such information. Because higher education institutions participate in financial 

activities such as making Federal Perkins Loans, the Federal Trade Commission has ruled 

that the safeguarding of consumer information specified by the Act also applies to 

colleges and universities. To comply with federal requirements to safeguard financial and 

other confidential information, UM must adhere to general standards and develop, put 

into effect, and maintain a comprehensive, written policy that contains administrative, 

technical, and physical safeguards for maintaining the confidentiality of non-public 

customer information.  Although the UM’s primary customers are students, in this 

context, a customer is defined to be a student, employee, or consumer who has a 

relationship under which UM provides a financial product or service.  

 

Confidential Information Collected and Stored 

 

As an educational institution, UM collects, retains, and uses non-public financial and 

confidential information about individual customers, as allowed by law, to provide 

services.  Non-public financial/confidential information is collected from sources such as: 

 

 Applications for admission and other forms 

 Financial transactions (checks, credit cards, and electronic funds transfers)  

 Protected health information (PHI), which is legally protected by the Federal 
Health Insurance Portability Accountability Act (HIPAA) 

 Transactions with UM affiliates 

 Consumer reporting agencies 

 State, federal, and other governmental agencies 

 Personal information (social security numbers, birth date, grades, and so on) 
 



The University of Mississippi 

 2 

In addition, UM collects, retains and uses non-public sensitive and confidential data and 

software to conduct research.   UM is required to prevent the intentional and 

unintentional export of research information in compliance with United States export 

control laws and regulations.  Export controls are United States federal government laws 

and regulations that restrict the release of items, information and software to restricted 

foreign countries, persons and entities (including universities).  Researchers who work 

with export-controlled information are subject to additional security requirements, e.g., 

the physical location where data is stored.  For more information, contact the Office of 

Research and Sponsored Programs (ORSP).  

 

UM entities may be involved with handling other federally regulated data that requires 

additional safeguarding or dissemination controls, including Controlled Unclassified 

Information (CUI).  The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special 

Publication 800-171 (NIST SP 800-171) outlines recommended requirements for non-

federal information systems that deal with CUI.  UM researchers and other internal 

entities involved with CUI must understand the scope and impact of the Federal 

Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) and ensure that the applicable NIST 

security framework can be implemented consistent with law, regulations, and 

government-wide policies.  For more information, see the NIST SP 800-171 publication 

and the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) CUI Registry. 

 

UM uses the definition of “information security” provided by SANS1: 

 

The processes and methodologies which are designed and implemented to protect 

print, electronic, or any other form of confidential, private and sensitive 

information or data from unauthorized access, use, misuse, disclosure, 

destruction, modification, or disruption. 

 

The security standards defined here apply to all types of sensitive and confidential 

information whether stored physically on the UM campus or hosted elsewhere.  

 

General Standards for Safeguarding Customer Information 

 

Overall safeguarding objectives are as follows: 

 

 Ensure the security and confidentiality of customer information in offices and 
data storage areas. 

 Identify and protect against anticipated threats to the security or integrity of 
confidential customer information. 

 Prevent the unauthorized access to, or use of, confidential customer information. 
 

To meet these objectives, UM department heads who oversee activities that involve 

access to or the storage of non-public customer information are required to put in place 

information security programs that include the following components: 

                                                 
1 See https://www.sans.org/information-security/. 

http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-171.pdf
https://archives.gov/cui/registry


The University of Mississippi 

 3 

 

 Designate an employee to develop and coordinate a departmental information 
security program that establishes the administrative, technical, or physical 

safeguards used to access, collect, distribute, process, protect, store, use, send, 

dispose of, or otherwise handle, customer information. 

 Identify reasonable, foreseeable internal and external risks to the security, 
confidentiality, and integrity of customer information that could result in the 

unauthorized disclosure, misuse, change, destruction, or compromise of such 

information, and assess the sufficiency of safeguards in place to control these 

risks.  This includes listing all assets and their vulnerabilities. 

 Establish risk assessment programs for the following areas: 

 Employee training and management 

 Information systems, including network and software design, also 
information processing, storage, transmission, and disposal 

 Detection, prevention, and response to attacks, intrusions, or systems 
failures 

 Select vendor partners and service providers that can maintain proper safeguards 
for customer information.  Contractually require service providers to put into 

effect and maintain such safeguards. 

 Periodically evaluate and adjust the departmental information security program 
based on the results of testing and monitoring. 

 

The Office of Information Technology (IT) and the IT Helpdesk are available to respond 

to specific security questions and to assist with training.  The IT Security Coordinator is 

available to help establish and evaluate information security programs. 

 

Detailed Standards for Safeguarding Customer Information 

 

1. Sharing Information with Affiliates 
 

To provide services, UM may disclose non-public financial/confidential information 

about a customer with business affiliates and other third parties. UM does not, and will 

not, disclose non-public financial/confidential information about customers, or former 

customers, to anyone, except as permitted by law.  

 

2. Employee Access to Confidential Information 
 

Employee access to customer information is restricted to those who have a legitimate 

business reason for getting such information and are educated about confidentiality and 

customer privacy.  See the Privacy in the Electronic Environment Policy for full details. 

 

3. Accountability 
 

Department heads are ultimately responsible for ensuring that information technology 

services deployed by that department meet the security requirements in this policy. 

 

https://olemiss.edu/privacy


The University of Mississippi 

 4 

4. Purpose for Storing Non-public Financial/Confidential Information 
 

Departments may not collect or store non-public financial/confidential information 

without having a legitimate purpose.  Departments may collect only the information 

needed to perform a specific task.  For example, a department may not collect a driver’s 

license number without having a written policy addressing the specific purpose and use 

of this information.  The Office of Internal Audit is available to help departments identify 

confidential information and document reasons for its collection.  See the Records 

Retention Policy for additional details.  

 

5. Use, Disclosure, and Retention 
 

UM will secure and manage private, non-public customer information according to all 

applicable state and federal laws about its use, disclosure, and retention. Customer 

information may only be used or disclosed for the purpose for which it was collected, 

unless the customer consents to its use for another purpose, or when the data is requested 

as permitted by law. Customer information may only be retained for the time noted in the 

Records Retention Policy.  If the information is to be used for another purpose, consent 

must be obtained from the customer before use.  When getting first permission or revised 

consent, the customer will be informed how long the information will be retained and 

how it will be destroyed. 

 

6. Safeguarding 
 

 Paper data such as copies of checks must be kept in locked rooms and physically 
secured file cabinets. 

 Calls or other requests for customer information must be routed to a designated 
individual who has been trained about its use, disclosure, and retention. 

 Attempts to gain fraudulent or unauthorized access to customer information must 
be reported to the Internal Auditing Office for evaluation.  

 

7. Disposal of Confidential Information 
 

Paper records containing confidential information must be confetti shredded.  Contact the 

Facilities Management Department for information about shredding of paper records.   

Computer equipment and electronic storage media (CDs, DVDs, hard disks, tapes, and so 

on) must be physically destroyed or reformatted / securely erased with IT oversight to 

prevent recovery of data.  

 

8. Customer Access to Confidential Data 
 

On request, customers will be informed of the existence, use, and disclosure of their 

information and will be given access to it with proper identification. Customers may 

verify the accuracy and completeness of their information, and may request that it be 

amended.  Any changes to customer data should be logged either through automated 

mechanisms or through manual processes.  Each department/unit is responsible for 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10649154
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10649154
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10649154
mailto:auditing@olemiss.edu


The University of Mississippi 

 5 

getting and presenting information when requested by a customer.  

 

9. Customer Complaints and Suggestions 
 

Students/customers may direct questions about the privacy principles or practices 

outlined above to department heads or their designees.  Each department/unit is 

responsible for dealing with customer complaints and suggestions. If a customer is not 

satisfied with the resolution provided by the department/unit, he/she should be referred to 

department’s next level of supervision. 

 

10. Monitoring and Testing of Security 
 

Each department is responsible for actively testing and monitoring its security practices 

and periodically evaluating and adjusting its information security program based on the 

results of testing and monitoring.  In addition, all servers and storage devices that contain 

sensitive information must be registered so they can be periodically scanned for 

vulnerabilities.  To register a server or workstation, login to myOleMiss and select      

UM System Registry under “Technology”. 

 

11. Contractors 
 

In the normal course of business, UM selects and contracts with external service 

providers. When choosing a service provider that will have access to customer 

information, the evaluation process will include the provider’s ability to safeguard 

customer information. 

 

Contracts with service providers will include the following provisions: 

 

 Explicit acknowledgment that the contract allows the contractor access to 
confidential information 

 A specific definition of the confidential information being provided 

 A stipulation that the confidential information will be held in strict confidence and 
accessed only for the explicit business purpose outlined in the contract 

 A guarantee from the contractor that it will ensure compliance with the protective 
conditions outlined in the contract 

 A guarantee from the contractor that it will protect the confidential information it 
gets according to commercially acceptable standards and no less rigorously than it 

protects its own customers’ confidential information 

 A provision allowing returning or destroying all confidential information obtained 
by the contractor, on finishing the contract 

 A stipulation allowing injunctive relief, without posting bond, to prevent or 
remedy breach of the contract’s or contractor’s confidentiality obligations 

 A stipulation that a violation of the contract's protective conditions amounts to a 
material breach of contract and entitles the University to immediately end the 

contract without penalty 

 A provision allowing auditing of the contractor’s compliance with the contract’s 



The University of Mississippi 

 6 

safeguard requirements 

 A provision ensuring that the contract’s protective requirements will survive 
ending the agreement 

 

12. Personal Computer, Server, and Mobile Security Practices 
 

Accounts 

 Individual account usage is governed by the IT Appropriate Use Policy. 

 Each user is responsible and liable for all processes started from his/her account; 
therefore, the user should secure his/her computer when leaving the office for any 

length of time.  

 All accounts should be secured using a password. 

 There should be no shared accounts.  

 Unnecessary preconfigured or default accounts that have generic passwords 
should be removed. 

 The password to default accounts should be changed before attaching the system 
to the network. 

 Use non-privileged accounts or roles when accessing non-security functions. 

 Prevent non-privileged users from executing privileged functions and audit the 
execution of such functions. 

 Use session/screensaver lock to prevent viewing/access of data after a certain 
period.  Session lock is recommended after 15 minutes of inactivity. 

 Terminate (automatically) a user session after 30 minutes or less of inactivity. 

 Limit unsuccessful logon attempts. 
 

Auditing 

 Review logs daily and question unusual traffic patterns.   

 Keep logs secure. 

 Backup logs externally for critical systems. 
 

Authentication 

 Passwords should be at least eight characters and changed every ninety days.  

 Strong passwords are difficult to guess and contain alpha, numeric, and shift 
characters.  Do not use words that can be found in the dictionary or identify 

anything of a personal nature (name, birthday, social security number, and so on). 

 Do not write passwords in notebooks or on desk leafs, or store them online.  

 Do not share passwords with anyone.  

 Passwords should be resistant to computer programs that check previously used 
passwords or easily compromised passwords. 

 Passwords should never be stored or entered in clear text form. 
 

Backups 

 University departments should have backup practices in alignment with their 

https://olemiss.edu/aup


The University of Mississippi 

 7 

business continuity management plans.  As a general matter, this means regular, 

periodic automated backup of any business-critical data that is stored exclusively 

on local machines.   The precise period of backup can vary with the business 

needs of the  unit, but must be frequent enough to enable the department to 

continue meeting its critical objectives despite loss (due to physical or logical 

failure, damage, or theft of the storage device) of the primary copy of the 

data. .  For guidance on evaluating information systems and operations to 

determine contingency planning requirements and priorities contact the office of 

Information Technology. 

 Store backup media offsite at an appropriate interval.  

 Storing business-critical data on University-approved cloud storage platforms can 
significantly reduce the need to perform automated backups of local 

machines.  Data stored in cloud services is protected, by the cloud vendor, 

from many common causes of data loss.  The Office of Information 

Technology strongly encourages the use of approved University cloud 

storage providers for this reason.  Other cloud storage providers should not be 

used to store University data without a contract that is fully vetted for compliance 

with University policies. For more information, see Appendix A. 

 Test the restore process. 
 

Firewalls 

 A personal desktop firewall must be installed on any computer system that either 
has access to or has confidential data stored.   

 A hardware firewall is also recommended in any instances where there are two or 
more computers with confidential data. 

 

Information Security 

 Institutional data transferred to personal computers, mobile devices, or shadow 
systems is the responsibility of the end user, who must ensure that the data is 

securely maintained and properly destroyed. 

 The University provides Secure Document Exchange via portal for sharing 
sensitive data within the University.  For more information, see Appendix A. 

 It is recommended that all UM owned mobile devices have disk-level encryption 
enabled by way of the operating system.  Devices should also have a PIN or 

Password screen-lock configured. 

 Mobile devices that will be used to store sensitive data must be approved by the 
IT Security Coordinator prior to use, and have disk-level encryption enabled. If 

disk-level encryption is not a viable option, the individual sensitive files may be 

encrypted with AES-256 encryption or equivalent instead. 

 Ensure that all connections to other servers have end-to-end security. Use Virtual 
Private Network (VPN) protection where appropriate.  

 Replace un-encrypted services and protocols with encrypted equivalents.  All 
remote-access protocols used to manage critical infrastructure and/or servers 

should be encrypted. Telnet should be replaced with SSH.  FTP should be 

replaced with SFTP.  X connections should be securely tunneled. 

https://olemiss.edu/fileshare


The University of Mississippi 

 8 

 Disable remote access software and services unless absolutely necessary. When 
remote access must be enabled for support or management reasons, restrict access 

to the service by IP address using local software firewalls. 

 Monitor remote support sessions.  Caution must be taken to ensure sensitive data 
is not accessible or exposed by way of support from unauthorized parties. 

 Servers should be configured to operate on non-standard network ports if at all 
possible.  This simple step can help prevent many common attacks and 

significantly lessen overall security risks. 

 All UM owned computers or servers, which are used to store, process, or transmit 
sensitive UM data, must be entered into the UM System Registry. The associated 

department must provide an active contact for each machine and ensure that 

registered information is kept current. 

 

Patches and Application Updates 

 Desktop computers and personal devices should be configured to apply 
application updates and operating system (OS) patches daily.  

 Patches should be applied to servers on a regular basis as frequently as is feasible.  

 Be alert for UM security announcements.  It is much easier to stay abreast of 
patches and apply protection than to rebuild a system that has been compromised.  

 

SMTP Mail Servers 

 The operation of mail servers without authorization by the IT Security 
Coordinator is not allowed. 

 Additional security requirements, e.g., restrictions on mail relaying, may be 
imposed for those who are permitted to run mail servers. 

 

TCP/IP 

 Disable unnecessary TCP/IP services.  

 Stay abreast of security issues for any TCP/IP services that you run. 
 

Time Synchronization 

 Keep your time synchronized with a reliable NTP server. This is critical to 
accurately compare event logs with other servers, which is needed when 

investigating attacks.  

 

Trust Relationships 

 Avoid using ~/.rhost and /etc/hosts equivalent entries on Linux or other Unix 
based operating systems.  Ideally, the .rhost capability should be permanently 

disabled. Verify Binaries. 

 Make sure that system files have not been replaced or manipulated by hackers.  

 Install only digitally signed applications, from a reputable source, signed by a 
third party certificate authority. 

 When suspicious of faulty system activity that could be the result of hackers or 

https://itsecurity.olemiss.edu/registry


The University of Mississippi 

 9 

malicious software, run a system file check utility or consider re-installing the 

operating system software.  Once complete, restore user content from a secure 

backup source. 

 

Viruses  

 UM-owned computers and servers must have software installed to protect against 
viruses from the Internet or other machines. The software should be configured to 

perform daily checking for updates and preferably configured in an active scan or 

real time scan mode.  

 Contact the IT Helpdesk for information on options for anti-virus software. 

 When a virus is detected, immediately disconnect the infected machine(s) from all 
networks and contact your systems administrator. 

 In cases where a systems administrator manages multiple machines, he/she should 
contact all users with access to the infected system, explain how to find out if 

related systems are infected, and how to remove the virus. 

 See Anti-Virus Protection for UM Computers for additional information.  
 

13. Software Applications and Cloud Services 
 

Department heads of units that procure and deploy software applications, including 

cloud-based services, are required to manage access to any sensitive information 

contained therein.  This includes provisioning access and de-provisioning access, i.e., 

granting access as employees enter the university, adjusting access as employees change 

roles, and removing access when employees leave the university.  Access is granted on a 

strict “need to know” basis and with the explicit approval of the employee’s supervisor, 

stating the job-related justification for the access.  Records must be maintained showing 

who authorized access along with time stamps showing when access was authorized.   

The specific implementation of the authorization mechanism is determined by the 

department head. 

 

14. Data Center Security Practices 
 

Access Security  

 Software and access security of all computing resources is maintained with a 
multi-tiered system of constructed user accounts (i.e., system operators are 

granted certain privileges, administrators other privileges, and so on). 

 All passwords are changed regularly. 

 Access to certain critical systems maintenance and administrative interfaces is 
restricted to defined physical locations to prevent online attacks or intrusions. 

 

Information Security 

 Data access above the account level is maintained via a layered firewall 
implementation that employs various filtering and authentication techniques in 

conjunction with virtual private networks. 

https://olemiss.edu/antivirus


The University of Mississippi 

 10 

 All confidential data transmitted between central administrative and academic 
systems, including backups, traverses a physically isolated secure network within 

the facility.   

 Monitoring of data access activity is accomplished via a centralized log server. 

 Sensitive data should not be stored on externally hosted systems, including cloud-
based storage systems, without a contract that is fully vetted for compliance with 

relevant UM policies.  For more information, see Appendix A. 

 

Network Security 

 Transmission of institutional data is routed through the campus network, which is 
a switched 100/1000/10000 Ethernet network.  

 Locked doors to communication distribution areas provide physical security of the 
network.   

 Where possible, data transmission is encrypted.  For example, web-based services 
that use non-public, authenticated data are usually encrypted using SSL. 

 

Offsite Backups 

 Offsite data backups are replicated to a remote site. These backups are intended 
for use in disaster recovery procedures. 

  

Protected Access Documentation 

 Online documentation and procedural sections for operations staff are maintained 
in the building but are not accessible from anywhere else on the Internet. 

 

Protection of Printed Materials 

 Printed reports are delivered only to approved locations and personnel, and are 
never distributed in a way that would allow unauthorized access to sensitive client 

information. Undelivered printed reports are shredded. 

 

Protection of Stored Magnetic Media 

 Access to stored magnetic media is restricted to authorized users only.   

 Magnetic media are wiped clean of stored information before they are discarded. 
 

Site Security 

 Physical security of the Data Center is maintained by an extensive anti-pass-back, 
fully monitored security system, which provides door-level information on all 

movement in the area and restricts access to authorized personnel.   

 Cameras and video monitors allow staff to verify the identity of those requesting 
access to the area. The monitors and door security are functional twenty-four 

hours a day, seven days a week. 

 

15. Multifunction Copier/Scanner/Printer Devices 
 



The University of Mississippi 

 11 

The University is aware that multifunction scanner/copier/printer devices may include the 

capability of storing documents. Whether owned by the University or leased, the 

University requires that these devices must be configured and maintained according to 

the following security guidelines: 

  

 Remote access to the device must require a complex, unique, eight (8) character 
password. Default passwords must be changed to meet this password requirement. 

Open, anonymous or unauthenticated access is prohibited.   The vendor must 

install the device with these password restrictions in place by default. 

 Unnecessary services must be disabled on printers.  Local storage of documents 
using ftp/samba or other sharing services, including cloud, should not be used. 

They should be disabled. 

 Email capabilities on printers can lead to data exposure. Use of this service is 
discouraged. Additional caution must be taken by the department to mitigate these 

risks if email is necessary.  In these cases, the device must be configured to use 

UM email servers, and transport-layer security should be enabled.  Additionally, 

the printer should require a code to be entered for usage.   

 When a multifunction device is taken out of service, the internal storage 
component must be overwritten to render data inaccessible.  If this level of 

protection cannot be accomplished, the internal storage component must be 

removed and delivered to UM procurement for destruction. 

 

Information Security Awareness Training 

 

IT provides security awareness training to all UM employees to help them keep abreast of 

the latest issues and techniques to protect university data. Security awareness training is a 

requirement for many UM employees.  Details about security awareness training and 

other related resources can be found on the IT Security website. 

 

UM Response to Incidents 

 

A suspected violation of this policy should be reported through proper administrative 

channels. 

 

 Violations by faculty members should be reported to the proper Department 
Chair, then to the Dean, then to the Provost, who will notify the IT Security 

Coordinator.  

 Violations by staff members should be reported to the supervisor, then to the 
department head.  The department head will then notify the Director of Human 

Resources and the IT Security Coordinator. 

 Violations by student employees should be reported to the supervisor, then to the 
department head.  The department head will then notify the Vice Chancellor for 

Student Affairs and the IT Security Coordinator. 

 

Once suspected violations have been reported through proper channels, the Provost, 

Human Resources Director, or Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs, the IT Security 

https://itsecurity.olemiss.edu/


The University of Mississippi 

 12 

Coordinator will make a preliminary investigation into the infraction and specific 

incident(s).  If the preliminary investigation shows just cause for disciplinary action, the 

case will be reviewed by proper judicial bodies and proper action(s) will be taken.  If the 

preliminary investigation finds just cause for criminal prosecution, the case also will be 

investigated by the University Police Department. 

 

Penalties to individuals for violating this policy are outlined in the UM Appropriate Use 

Policy. 

 

In the event of a data breach, UM is subject to MS-DITS and U.S. Department of 

Education (DoE) reporting requirements as well as to the Mississippi Data Breach 

Notification Law2.  Included in the MS-DITS requirements are the following: 

 

 Each agency must report all information security incidents to the MS-DITS 

Information Security Division (ISD) as soon as possible. 

 Each agency is responsible for assessing the significance of a security incident 

within their organization and for providing this information to MS-DITS ISD 

based on the business impact on affected resources and the current and potential 

technical effect of the incident (e.g., loss of revenue, productivity, access to 

services, reputation, unauthorized disclosure of sensitive information, or 

propagation to other networks).   

 Each agency is responsible for contacting the appropriate law enforcement and 

investigative authorities if criminal action is suspected. 

Mississippi law requires that the Mississippi residents be notified in cases of data 

breaches of their personal information.  The legislation language defines personal 

information, outlines the circumstances that entail a breach, and provides related details 

such as timeliness of reporting.  

 

UM uses the Internet2 Data Incident Notification Toolkit3 as a best practice for 

responding to incidents. 

 

Additional Information 

 

See the following UM policies for additional information related to Information 

Confidentiality/Security: IT Appropriate Use and Privacy in the Electronic Environment 

                                                 
2 See billstatus.ls.state.ms.us/documents/2010/pdf/HB/0500-0599/HB0583SG.pdf 
3 See https://spaces.internet2.edu/display/2014infosecurityguide/Data+Incident+Notification+Toolkit. 

https://olemiss.edu/aup
https://olemiss.edu/aup
https://olemiss.edu/aup
https://olemiss.edu/privacy


Appendix A: Platform Security Chart   

Information Confidentiality/Security Policy 

The University of Mississippi 

https://olemiss.edu/ics 

Appendi x A: Platform Security C hart  

PLATFORM SECURITY CHART 

PLATFORM  DESCRIPTIONS 

UM IT Managed 
Technology in UM 

Data Center [1] 

UM Technology  
Connected to the  

Campus Network [2] 
UM Box [3] 

UM Office 365 
and OneDrive [3] 

UM Go Email 
and Drive [3] 

Other UM 
Managed Cloud 

Services [3] 

UM Mobile 
Technology [4] 

Approved  
Dept. Software 
Applications [5] 

Personally 
Owned / Managed 

Technology [6] 

UM DATA 
CLASSIFICATION          

Instructional Data          
Student Educational 
Records (FERPA) [7]          

Protected Health 
Information (ePHI) [8]          

Payment Card Industry 
Information (PCI)          

Mississippi Data Breach 
Notification Law [9]          

Other 
Sensitive Data [10]          

All Other 
Non-Sensitive Data          

 

Platform Security Chart: References    

1. Refers to systems such as SAP, Blackboard, etc. that are managed by professional IT staff with the highest security levels. 

2. Refers to non-mobile, university-issued computers and storage devices connected to the campus network, which are outside of the 
University of Mississippi (UM) Data Center, or within the Data Center but not behind most restrictive Data Center firewalls. 

3. UM IT implementations of Box, Google Apps, and Microsoft 365 offer a certain level of protection, but each user is responsible for 
managing their own shared access settings and preventing data exposure. Review account security and sharing settings often. 

4. This includes university-issued computers and storage devices. The user is responsible for securing the device and preventing data 
exposure. Mobile devices approved to store sensitive data must be encrypted. 

5. The department head is responsible for ensuring that the data and application is properly secured. Sensitive data must be encrypted. 

6. Policy restrictions apply to storing UM data on a personal device, or storing it remotely using a personal account on a cloud service. 
This includes platforms such as Dropbox, iCloud, Adobe, AWS, and other hosting/storage/collaboration/messaging services. 

7. Relevant email communication specific to an individual student is permitted. However, this communication is only permitted between 
official UM email platforms (@olemiss.edu and @go.olemiss.edu).  Sets of data, which have not been de-identified, including grades 
and other non-directory information, may not be emailed. UM Registrar policies related to FERPA also apply. 

8. The storage, processing, or transmission of any electronic Protected Health Information (ePHI) must be approved by the IT Security 
Coordinator. HIPAA affected areas may require additional resources including 3rd party audits at the expense of the department. 

9. Mississippi law requires notifying individuals when particular personal information is digitally exposed. This includes an individual's 
first name, or first initial and last name, in combination with any of these elements: • Social Security number • State ID card number  
• Driver's license number • Financial/debit/credit account number with security password/code.  Encrypted data is excluded. 

10. Includes sensitive Identifiable Human Subject Research data, which requires UM Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval, in 
addition to approval by the IT Security Coordinator. Also includes Export Controlled Research data (ITAR, EAR), Gramm Leach 
Bliley Act (GLBA) financial data, and other federally designated Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI).  Additional compliance 
needs and restrictions may be applicable. These resources are to be provided by the affected department. 

 Additional Notes on Sensitive Data 

 Email is NOT a permitted medium for any un-encrypted sensitive data, unless specific exclusions are defined herein. 
 All UM systems (servers, desktops, laptops, other mobile devices, etc.) with sensitive data MUST be in the UM System Registry 

 

 
 

 Permitted 

 Must be protected as defined by UM policy 

  Not permitted 

 
 Requires prior approval by IT Security 

Coordinator 

 

 Do not email FERPA records to non-

olemiss.edu addresses 

 Devices (computers, tablets, phones, etc.) must 

adhere to specific security standards as defined 

by UM policy 

  

 
 

https://olemiss.edu/ics
https://itsecurity.olemiss.edu/registry

