
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Mechanical, Telecommunications and Custodial Areas 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To provide guidance for the use and access to rooms or closets containing   
mechanical and electrical equipment, communications facilities, and custodial supplies. 
 

General   
   

The term “equipment rooms” identifies any rooms, closets or defined spaces used by Facilities 

Management and/or Telecommunications to house infrastructure necessary to service the needs of 

occupants of a building.   

   

Equipment rooms in buildings contain custodial, heating, air conditioning, electrical, water, and   

telecommunications equipment necessary to serve the building. The equipment is dangerous to   

personnel entering the rooms who are not trained or familiar with the equipment or the high   

voltage that may be present.   

   

High voltage electrical rooms on campus currently contain transformers with incoming primary 

power of 12,470 volts.  The terminals for these transformers are open air and uninsulated.  It is 

particularly dangerous for even Facilities Management personnel who are not trained in high voltage 

safety to enter these rooms and electrical vaults.  These areas need to be keyed separately and keys 

for these rooms be issued to a small group of qualified persons only. 

   

Telecommunications rooms contain sensitive voice, video, and data equipment to serve the needs   

of faculty, staff, and students. Security requirements are mandatory to prevent illegal access to   

personal voice and data information by unauthorized personnel.   

   

Custodial closets contain chemicals used in the day-to-day cleaning of buildings. An untrained   

person can be unnecessarily exposed to chemicals that may result in serious injury.   

   

All mechanical rooms need to be cleared of office paraphernalia such as chairs, tables, boxes of 

paper and office electronics that are currently stored in them.  This equipment, if no longer in use, 

needs to be taken to procurement for disposal or stored elsewhere.   

   

Policy   
   

The use of equipment rooms for anything other than the designed purpose, especially storage, is   

prohibited by International Fire Code (section 315.2.3) which states that combustible materials   

shall not be stored in equipment rooms.   

   

Access to equipment rooms is restricted to Facilities Management, Telecommunications Center, and   

authorized vendor personnel under the supervision of UM Staff. All equipment rooms will have   

high security locks and keys.   

   

   

To prevent unauthorized access to equipment rooms, only Facilities Management or 

Telecommunications Center personnel will have access to high security entry keys.   

   



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

Maintaining the security and access integrity of mechanical rooms ensures the safety of the   

building and occupants from unnecessary exposure to the hazards of fire, chemical, mechanical,  

electrical, injuries, and vandalism.   

 


