
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Shift Differential Pay 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The definition of each shift, the methods of how shift differential is 

calculated, and who qualifies for shift differential are given. 

 

 

Three shifts are defined: Day-7 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Evening-3 p.m. to 11 p.m.; and Night-11 p.m. to 7 

a.m.  

 

Full-time, nonexempt employees working regular shifts of which a minimum of five (5) hours 

fall outside the Day shift will receive differential pay for all hours worked during their shift. 

Part-time employees working the majority of their shift outside the Day shift will receive 

differential pay for all hours worked during their shift.  

 

Shift differential pay will be three (3) percent for the Evening shift and six (6) percent for the 

Night shift. In cases where the regular assigned hours cross two shifts, the percentage differential 

is determined by the shift in which the majority of the qualifying hours fall.  

 

Employees working weekends and "unusual" shifts will receive three (3) percent differential pay 

for working such a shift on a regular basis. "Regular basis" for purposes of this policy means 

regular work during at least two weekends per month. Employees who work only one day a 

weekend will receive a one and one-half (1½) percent differential. "Unusual" shift schedules will 

be submitted to Human Resources for approval for payment of this differential.  

 

Employees working both on weekends and the Evening or Night shifts will receive both 

differentials.  

 

Employees working normal 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. office hours and asked occasionally to work before 

or after normal work hours will not receive differential pay for hours worked. Likewise, salary 

rates of employees asked to temporarily change their shifts will not be affected by the temporary 

changes. For purposes of this policy, temporary is defined to be less than 30 days.  

 

The shift differential is intended to reward employees for the inconvenience of working a 

substantial portion of their time outside the normal workday or workweek. The differential 

increment is to be calculated based upon the employee's "current" rate, but is not to become a 

part of the employee's "base" rate.  

 

This policy has been developed to define the shift differential provided to employees working 

"fixed" shifts. "Rotating" shifts are not covered by this policy.  

 

Overtime, Compensatory Leave, Personal (vacation) Leave, Major Medical (sick) Leave, and 

terminal leave will be paid at the "current" rate, the "base" rate plus the shift differential the 

employee is receiving at the time.  

 


