
The University of Mississippi 
 

Page 1 of 1 
 

Departmental Time Record  

 
Summary/Purpose: The qualifications for those employees whose time records must be retained, 

guidelines and retention rules are given.  

 

All departments are required to utilize Form UM4/HR12 unless time is being recorded using the 

Employee Self-Service (ESS) time management application on the myOleMiss portal. Time 

recorded electronically via the ESS application is retained within SAP. 

 

To ensure consistent time and attendance reporting, time for employees paid on an hourly basis 

should be recorded in quarter of an hour increments (7 minutes or less is rounded down and 8 

minutes or more is rounded up).     

 

For those departments who are not utilizing the ESS application, Form UM4/HR12 must be 

prepared for hours worked each payroll period for non-exempt (hourly) employees. Form 

UM4/HR12 must also be prepared for leave time taken within each payroll period for non-exempt 

employees and eligible exempt employees. The form must be signed by the employee certifying 

that the hours worked and/or leave taken are accurate. It must also be reviewed and signed by the 

department head or his/her designee (i.e. employee’s direct supervisor) certifying that the hours 

worked and/or leave taken were approved and are accurate.   

 

Approved paper forms are entered into the SAP time management component. To maintain a 

separation of duties, each department must designate one employee who is responsible for 

verifying and entering the form data into SAP, and another employee who is responsible for SAP 

data entry verification and approval.  

 

Each department must retain all Forms UM4/HR12 for a minimum period of seven (7) fiscal years; 

the period may be longer if required by an external funding agency. These forms serve as payroll 

records for exempt and non-exempt employees, and activity reports for non-exempt employees 

paid from federal projects/grants. It is the responsibility of each department within the University 

to retain copies of Forms UM4/HR12, and all departments must adhere to the retention 

requirement. The departmental copy is the official record of the University and must be readily 

available for audit from state or federal agencies.  
 


