
The University of Mississippi 
 

Military Leave of Absence 
 

Summary/Purpose: This policy contains information regarding employees who take a 
leave of absence due to military training or duty.  Notification of activation and request 
for leave of absence, benefits available upon reemployment, and employer and employee 
responsibility is also given. 
 
The University provides leave as mandated by the Uniformed Services Employment and 
Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA). 
 
Under provisions of USERRA, University employees are entitled to leave of absence 
without pay for voluntary or involuntary military training or service.   
 
Employees are required to give advance written or verbal notice of his/her intent to take a 
leave of absence to perform military service.  Notice should be provided as far in advance 
as is reasonable under the circumstances.  The employee’s department must permit the 
employee to take additional time immediately preceding his/her military service for safe 
travel and to ensure the employee arrives at his/her destination fit to perform military 
service.  The department must process an HR Form 3 to place the employee on leave of 
absence. 
 
A leave of absence with pay not in excess of fifteen days annually (based on calendar 
year) may be granted to a permanent employee who, as a member of the National Guard, 
official militia of Mississippi, or a member of any of the reserve components of the 
armed forces, is ordered to active duty.    
 
Continuation of health related insurance benefits is available for employees on either paid 
or unpaid leave of absence.  Premiums will be collected via payroll deduction for 
employees who are on paid leave and electing continuation of coverage.  Monthly billing 
notices will be mailed to the address on record.  The employee who elects to waive 
coverage while on leave is entitled to reenrollment of benefits upon return to active status 
with the University.  Completion of enrollment applications within 30 days from the date 
of reemployment is required. 
 
The employee is not required to notify the employer of his/her intent to seek 
reemployment after completion of military service.  Notification that an employee does 
not intend to return to employment does not forfeit his/her rights to reemployment upon 
release from duty or training.  Service for a cumulative period of up to five (5) years 
entitles reemployment rights.  Exclusions to this provision are defined by USERRA. 
 
Upon successful completion of military service, the employee must notify the University 
of his/her intent to return to work in a timely manner.  Timely notification is defined as 
follows. 
 

1 



2 

• Absence from work for periods of service lasting less than 31 days or for a period 
of any length for the purpose of a fitness examination:  the employee must report 
to work no later than the beginning of the first full regularly scheduled work 
period on the first full calendar day following completion of service, and the 
expiration of 8 hours after the period permitted for safe transportation from the 
place of service to the employee’s place of residence. 

 
• Periods of service that extend from more than 30 days but less than 181 days:  a 

written or verbal application for reemployment must be submitted not later than 
14 days after completion of service.  In instances where the employee is unable to 
apply within 14 days through no personal fault, he/she has until the next full 
calendar day after it is possible to submit an application. 

 
• A period of service more than 180 days:  the employee has 90 days after 

completing military service to submit application. 
 

One of the following forms of documentation must be furnished for reemployment when 
uniformed service exceeds 30 days.  The document will also serve as supporting 
documentation for a waiver of pre-existing conditions when applying for reinstatement of 
health benefits. 
  

• DD214 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty). 
• Copy of duty orders prepared by the facility where the orders were fulfilled 

confirming completion of service.   
• Letter from the commanding officer of a Personnel Support Activity or someone 

of comparable authority. 
• Certificate of completion from military training school. 
• Discharge certificate indicating character of service. 
• Copy of extract from payroll documents showing periods of service. 
• Letter from National Disaster Medical System (NDMS) Team Leader or 

Administrative Officer verifying dates and times of NDMS training or Federal 
activation. 

 
Returning employees are entitled to reemployment in a job position with seniority, status, 
benefits, and pay that he/she would have reasonably attained had he/she not been called 
to active duty.   
 
Participants of the Public Employees’ Retirement System of Mississippi (PERS) are 
eligible to receive four (4) years service credit for active military duty, as defined in the 
PERS Handbook, providing a DD214 is furnished.  Additional service credit exceeding 
four (4) years is permissible provided the employee completes PERS Forms 25A, 25D, 
and 25M and both the employer and employee remit contribution payments, including 
interest, within the following time frame:  from the reemployment date continuing up to 
three times the length of the employee’s immediate past period of military service not to 
exceed 5 years. 
 


