
 
The University of Mississippi 

 
Non-Institutional Employment Practices (Outside Employment) 

 
Summary/Purpose:  As regulated by the Board of Trustees of State Institutions of 
Higher Learning, in order to engage in outside employment, faculty and staff 
members must complete the HR Form 9, Application For Permission to Engage in 
Outside Employment or Practice of Profession, and forward it through the proper 
channels for approval to engage in outside employment.  
 
Faculty and staff members desiring to engage in outside employment or practice of 
profession should complete HR Form 9, Application For Permission to Engage in 
Outside Employment or Practice of Profession, and forward it through channels to 
the Chancellor for approval.  
 
The regulations established, Board Policy 801.08, by the Board of Trustees of State 
Institutions of Higher Learning, at its January 1998 meeting, regarding outside 
employment are as follows:   
 

Members of the faculty and staff are permitted to engage in outside 
employment, provided permission is first obtained from the executive officer 
of the institution concerned, and provided further, that the executive officer 
of the institution concerned shall grant permission to engage in outside 
employment only after having first determined that the said outside 
employment will interfere in no way with the institutional duties of the 
individual requesting such permission.   
 
In addition, such individuals will not engage in a business or profession that 
would in any manner compete with a similar business or profession over 
which he/she would have direct supervision, inspection, or purchasing 
authority within the university or agency, such being a conflict of interest. 

 
The form is available on the Department of Human Resources website and must be 
completed or updated at the beginning of each fiscal year or each time the outside 
employment changes, whichever occurs sooner.  If the employee works/consults 
during regular business hours, the employee must charge this time to personal 
(vacation) leave unless the absence of the employee has been certified as qualifying 
under the Faculty Consulting Policy. 
 
It is the responsibility of the employee’s supervisor to ensure the employee 
complies with these policies. 
 
This form requires the approval of the Chancellor and must be maintained in the 
employee’s personnel file in Human Resources. 
 



Example of outside employment include but are not limited to: 
 After hours and weekend hours working in a retail shop 
 Sale and distribution of products such as Mary Kay, Avon, CAbi, Juice Plus, 

jewelry, etc. 
 Adjunct instructors working at other institutions 
 Faculty members consulting or participating in outside business ventures 
 
Faculty Consulting: 
 
In general, faculty consulting is defined as professional activity that enhances the 
person’s value and experience as a faculty member or advances the University’s 
mission, where a fee-for-service or equivalent relationship with a third party exists.  
Reference policy “Faculty Consulting Policy.” 
 
Military Leave: 
 
Fifteen days of Military Leave annual as provided by law is exempt from the 
requirement for use of Personal leave, but is to be reported.  Reference policy 
“Military Leave of Absence.” 
 
Passive and Unearned Income: 
 
Passive income from a venture in which an individual does not directly participate 
(such as rent or limited partnership) and unearned income (such as dividends, 
pension payments, and capital gains) are not considered outside employment for 
the purpose of this policy. 
 
 


