
The University of Mississippi 

  
Page 1 of 2 

 

 

 
 

State Retirement 
 

Summary/Purpose:   All employees (except students) of the University who are employed one- 

half- time or more and for at least 4½ months are included in the Public Employees’ Retirement 

System.  There are two retirement programs administered by PERS; the defined benefit program 

and the defined contribution program (ORP).   The contribution amount, benefit highlights, and 

who qualifies for each program are given. 

 
I. General Statement 

 
The  Public  Employees'  Retirement  System  (PERS),  enacted  by  the  1952  Legislature  and 

amended by the Laws of 1980 and 2010, includes all employees of the University who are 

employed one-half time or more and for at least 4½ months. Employees (except students) must 

join one of two retirement programs administered by PERS: the defined benefit program (for 

most employees) or the defined contribution program (Optional Retirement Plan) which is only 

available to teaching and administrative faculty employed after July 1, 1990. Effective July 1, 

1998, ORP allows enrollment for newly-employed librarians with academic rank, coaches, and 

administrative department heads.   Effective July 1,  2001, ORP  allows  enrollment for newly- 

employed Research Scientists and Postdoctoral Research Associates. 

 
II. Contributions 

 
PERS  (Defined  Benefit Program): 

• Employee  Contribution—9.00%  of  eligible earnings up  to $270,000  

• Employer Contribution—15.75% 

 
Optional Retirement  Plan (Defined Contribution Program): 

• Employee  Contribution—9.00% of eligible earnings up to $270,000  

• Employer Contribution—15.75% (2.475% of the employer contribution  is  retained 

by PERS for the accrued liability contribution fund, .1575% for an administrative 

fee, with 13.1175% applied to the employee's account with the company selected.) 

 
In accordance with IRS Code Section 415(c)(1)(A) and the ORP Plan Document,  

the contribution limit is $54,000. 

 
III. Benefit Highlights of PERS Defined Benefit Program 

 
a.   Eight-year vesting. 

 
b.  Monthly retirement benefits. 

1.   Members hired on or before June 30, 2007 may retire at age 60 with at least four (4) 

years of service or with 25 years of creditable service, regardless of age. 

2.   Members hired July 1, 2007 to June 30, 2011 may retire at age 60 with at least eight 



The University of Mississippi 

  
Page 2 of 2 

 

 

 
(8) years of service or with 25 years of creditable service, regardless of age. 

3.   Members hired on or after July 1, 2011 may retire at age 60 with at least eight (8) 

years of service or with 30 years of creditable service, regardless of age. 

 
(Note: Only four years of vesting is required for employees who entered covered service 

before July 1, 2007 if they remain continuously active or do not get a refund for their 

contributions once they become inactive.) 

 
c.   Right to select retirement option. 

 

 

d.   Spouse survivorship benefits after vesting, if married at least one year immediately 

preceding death. 
 

e.   For members who joined PERS after June 30, 1992, and active members on that date 

who  elected  to  make  the  change,  the  disability  allowance  consists  of  a  temporary 

allowance and a deferred allowance. The temporary allowance is either 40 percent of 

average compensation at the time of disability, plus 10 percent of average compensation 

for each of the first two dependent children during their dependency years, or the accrued 

benefit  based  upon  actual  service,  whichever  is  greater.  The  temporary  allowance  is 

payable for a period based upon the member's age at the time of disability, but not less 

than one year. The deferred allowance begins when the temporary allowance ceases and 

is payable for life. It will be either the amount that would have been payable had the 

member continued in service until the termination of the temporary allowance, but not 

more than 40 percent of average compensation, or the accrued benefit based upon actual 

service at the time of disability, whichever amount is greater. 

 
Active members as of June 30, 1992, who did not choose the new option will receive 

benefits under the previous disability law. Under the previous law, after four years of 

service, a member's annuity is based upon the amount payable as a retirement allowance 

had the member continued in service until the age of 60. 

 
f.     Right  of  employee  (or  beneficiary  in  case  of  death  of  employee)  to  withdraw  all 

contributions to the program upon separation from state service. 

 
IV. Benefit Highlights of ORP Defined Contribution Program 

 
a.  Immediate vesting 

b.  Portability 

c.  Retirement at any age 

 
d.  Control over investment 

e.  No risk of intervention 


