
Salary Increases 

Summary/Purpose: Information regarding how both faculty and staff salaries may increase 

through budget-accommodating merit increases and/or promotions is given. Faculty and staff 

members at The University of Mississippi should always be aware of policies and procedures 

pertaining to salary increases. Criteria for salary and wage increases may be established by the 

Mississippi Legislature or by members of the Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher 

Learning, usually the adoption of a specific policy for one fiscal year. As soon as such criteria are 

made known to the University administration, budget officers are notified (an example might be a 

requirement that all employees be given an across-the-board salary increase of a certain percent). 

Upon approval of the Budget by the Board of Trustees, budget-related information (titles and 

salaries) is provided to the respective employees.  

Salary increases based on merit and equity (as opposed to extra responsibilities, promotions, etc.) 

are awarded during the normal, fiscal budget cycle. The only exceptions to the timing of these 

increases are in instances when a funding agency awards pay increases on a cycle different from 

the University’s fiscal cycle.  Any pay increase based on merit or equity awarded as an exception 

to the established budget preparation and approval timeline (established each year prior to the start 

of the new fiscal year) will not be effective at the start of the new fiscal year.  Instead, they will be 

effective January 1 or the beginning of the following fiscal year, whichever immediately follows 

the completion of the paperwork.  

Staff members in classified positions are kept informed of salary increase policies at all times; at 

present, the University is following a variable compensation plan provided by Morris and 

Associates after a long study. Staff members are notified on employment of their specific status 

and are provided information about salary increases available when they advance to higher 

positions.  

For both faculty and staff, merit is, in most budget years, the most important factor in the 

determination of salary increases. Budget officers are provided specific directions by members of 

the administration each year as budgets are to be prepared for the next year. In most cases, budget 

directors will be provided a range of salary increase possibilities and told that the biggest factor 

should be rewarding meritorious service.  

Faculty members are also kept apprised of standard increments for promotion in rank--at present, 

$5,500 for promotion to associate professor and $8,500 for promotion to professor. 

Persons accepting administrative appointments are also aware of supplements that may be added 

for assuming administrative duties, for example, department chair, associate dean, etc. 


