
The University of Mississippi 

Policy Code HRO.BE.600.150. 

Generated on 02/13/2014 at 21:41:41 CST 

The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 

See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. Page 1 of 2 

 

 

 

 

Tuition Benefit for Children of Faculty and Staff 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Qualifying guidelines are given for children of faculty and staff to receive 

a tuition waiver benefit. 

 
The undergraduate tuition remission policy applies to all single dependent children of benefit 

eligible, full-time faculty and staff of the University of Mississippi. The parent must be 

employed as of the first date of the term for which the benefit is provided. Stepchildren will be 

eligible if they meet all other requirements. This policy applies both to the Oxford and Jackson 

campuses. The Office of Financial Aid will determine dependency status based upon the 

definition used for the federal student aid programs. 

 
In order to receive the tuition benefit, a dependent must gain admission to the University and 

make a formal written request to the Office of Financial Aid. The implementation of this policy 

will be consistent with Financial Aid policies. 

 
A tuition benefit representing full tuition if enrolled full-time, is available to single dependent 

children of benefit eligible, full-time faculty and staff of the University who were employed prior 

to July 1, 1977 (August 16, 1977, for nine-month faculty), and have been continuously employed 

since that time. A benefit in this amount is also available to dependent children if both parents 

are benefit eligible, full-time employees of the University and are employed as of the first date 

of the term for which the benefit is provided.  A tuition benefit representing one-half tuition per 

semester is available to all the children of benefit eligible, full-time faculty and staff who have 

been employed since July 1, 1977, and who are employed as of the first date of the term for 

which the benefit is provided. 

 
Continuing Education and Independent Study Courses are included under this program. 

 
A dependent may receive the tuition waiver benefit (consistent with the continued employment 

of the parent or guardian) until the degree requirements for one baccalaureate degree are met at 

this institution as long as he or she remains an enrolled student or until age 25, whichever comes 

first. 

 
Children of employees who die in service are eligible for the benefit provided all other eligibility 

requirements have been met. 

 
The benefit is also available to children of retired employees or deceased retirees who have 

retired  under  the  Public  Employees'  Retirement  System  of  Mississippi  or  the  Optional 

Retirement Plan, if all other eligibility requirements are met. To qualify for this benefit, the ORP 

retiree would have had to be eligible for PERS retirement at time of retirement. 

 
Undergraduate programs at The University of Mississippi Medical Center also qualify under this 

benefit. 

 
The combination of this benefit and other scholarships earmarked for tuition cannot exceed 100 

percent of the tuition charges. 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;policyObjidPara=10659141


The University of Mississippi 

Policy Code HRO.BE.600.150. 

Generated on 02/13/2014 at 21:41:41 CST 

The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 

See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. Page 2 of 2 

 

 

 
 

Application forms for this benefit are available from the Office of Financial Aid and should be 

returned to that office at least 3 days prior to the first day of registration. 

 
Disclaimer 

 

Dependent Child Waiver: 

Please note that additional fees may be assessed for some classes.  These fees average $30.00 but 

can range from $5.00 to $100.00 and are NOT covered by this policy.  Dependent Children of 

Faculty and Staff members wishing to enroll in classes where an additional lab/class fee is 

charged will be responsible for paying this charge. 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;policyObjidPara=10659141

