
Flextime Schedules 

 

 Summary/Purpose:  Flextime schedules may offer advantages to both employees and the 

department.  This policy is in place to support the University’s objective of enhancing positive 

work/life balance, as well as supplying a mechanism for departments to better manage 

workloads.  

 

Subject to department head approval, flextime schedules afford the opportunity for work hours 

that differ from the University’s regular business hours.  Departments are encouraged to consider 

flexible schedules when it is in the best interest of the employees and the department.  Flexibility 

in schedules may assist the employee with meeting family needs, personal obligations, and 

wellness commitments, while also providing a tool for departments to control the cumulative 

number of hours worked within the designated workweek.  

 

Successful implementation of flextime schedules requires collaboration, communication, and 

cooperation. The decision to allow flextime scheduling is to be made by the department head.  A 

flextime schedule is appropriate only when the work schedule is beneficial to the University.  

Working a flextime schedule is a privilege, not an employee right. For some departments, 

flextime scheduling may not be feasible. Contact the Department of Human Resources if 

guidance is needed regarding flextime schedules. 

 

The following general standards will apply to flextime schedules: 

 

1. Offices are to remain open with adequate staff during normal or core business hours, 
with designated offices remaining open during the noon hour.  

 

2. The lunch break is to typically remain one hour in length; however, different lunch 
increments may be established at the discretion of the department head. At least a ½ 

hour lunch break should be provided to and taken by the employee. 

 

3. The decision to allow flextime scheduling is to be made by the department head, 
within Division guidelines.  

 

4. A supervisor may establish a flextime schedule to better meet the needs of the 
department and manage the accrual of overtime or compensatory leave.  

 

5. Working a flextime schedule is a privilege.  An employee with a pattern of 
tardiness/absences or poor work performance may not be eligible for a flexible 

schedule.  

 

6. The supervisor reserves the right at any time to return an employee to his or her 
standard schedule if the flextime schedule interferes with the department’s operations 

or if a change in circumstances necessitates the return to the standard work schedule. 

 



7. Compressed work schedules are only permitted where job and business-related needs 
can continue to be met under a compressed schedule. A compressed work week is 

one in which employees work the standard 40-hour work week, but in less than five 

days in one week or in less than ten days in one pay period. For example, an 

employee might work four 10 hour days [7 a.m. to 6 p.m. with an hour for lunch] and 

then have a day off that week.   

 

 

 

 

 


