
The University of Mississippi 

Use of University Facilities for Private Enterprise 

Summary/Purpose:  Regulations and guidelines are given for the use of buildings and other 
facilities for commercial enterprises, political or sectarian meetings and for the use of state 
property for private business by faculty and staff. 

It is the policy of the Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning that buildings 
and other facilities will not be made available for commercial enterprises without specific 
approval of the Board. This policy is stated in the following paragraph extracted from the Board 
of Trustees Bylaws and Policies manual:  

    In general it shall be the policy of the several institutions not to make available the buildings
    and other facilities of the institutions to outside organizations. Exceptions to this policy may
    be approved by the executive officer of an institution.

No exception shall be approved for commercial enterprises, political or sectarian meetings, 
without specific approval of the Board.

Although this policy does not directly address the use by faculty and staff of University space, 
facilities, and equipment for activities from which they derive private income, it does suggest the 
guidelines for University policy in this regard.

It is the general intent of the University that one not use state property for private business. 
However, it is clearly recognized that there are circumstances when limited use of University 
space, facilities, and equipment by a University employee for profit is acceptable. Such limited 
use is acceptable if the activity concerned (1) is related to the area of expertise for which the 
individual is employed by the University, (2) if participation in the activity will enhance the 
professional growth of the individual, and (3) if the following guidelines are observed:

    1.    The use of space, facilities, and equipment may not be on a significant scale and must not  
           interfere with normal academic use.  

    2.    University stationery, forms, etc., are not to be used in connection with such activity.

    3.   The name of The University of Mississippi is not to be used in any advertisement or    
telephone directory listing, nor may any advertisement provide a University office address 
or telephone number as a business address or business telephone.

4.    The University is to be reimbursed for the use of all expendable materials and for 
appropriate services (such as computer time).  

    5.    The individual engaging in such activity must first submit and have approved a University
           HR Form 9, Application for Permission to Engage in Outside Employment or Practice of  
           Profession.

Page 1 of 1 


