
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Disbursement of Earnings 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Information is given concerning how to participate in electronic direct 
deposit.  Pay dates of both twelve-month staff employees and nine-month faculty members can 
also be found. 
 
Electronic Transfer of Funds 
The University offers electronic direct deposit of pay to all employees, including students. To 
participate in this service, an employee should sign an Authorization Agreement For Direct 
Deposits. The form is available in the Department of Human Resources. In addition, the 
employee should provide the Department of Human Resources a voided check. Employees who 
sign up for this service will be able to view their pay on the internet.    
 
Release of Checks 
Employees who do not participate in electronic direct deposit will receive their checks at their 
home address. Checks will be mailed to employees in the following manner:  
 
1.    For faculty, staff, and student employees, checks will be released to the U.S. Postal Service 

on the morning of the 15th and the last working day of the month. In the event an          
employee’s check has not been delivered by the 5th postal business day after payday 
(excluding postal holidays), the employee may request a reissue of their paycheck by 
contacting the Department of Human Resources. 

 
2.    For faculty employed on a 9-month basis, a check for one-half month's salary is released to 

the mail service on the morning of the last working day in August. A check for one-half 
month's salary is released to the mail service on the morning of the 15th and the last 
working day of September through April.  A final check for one-half month's salary is 
released on May 15.  

 
3.    When an official University holiday falls on a regular payroll check release date, checks are 

released to the mail service on the afternoon of the day prior to the holiday.  
 
Graduate instructors, graduate assistants, laboratory assistants, and other salaried student 
assistants may be paid on the same basis as 9-month faculty members.  
 


