
   

The University of Mississippi 

 

Major Medical (sick) Leave for Nine-Month Faculty Members 
 
 

Summary/Purpose:   This policy provides  information  regarding the accrual  rate of 

major medical (sick) leave for nine-month faculty members and temporary members as 

given. 

 
Effective July 1, 1988, nine-month faculty members and temporary faculty who are 

benefits eligible shall accrue Major Medical (sick) Leave in increments as follows.  Part- 

time faculty members who work one-half time or more will earn Major Medical (sick) 

Leave credit on a pro-rata basis.  Accumulation amounts are unlimited. 

 
Continuous Service Monthly Accrual Rate Annual Accrual Rate 

1 month to 3 years 13.33 hours 119.97 hours 

37 months to 8 years 14.20 hours 127.80 hours 

97 months to 15 years 15.40 hours 138.60 hours 

Over 15 years 16.00 hours 144.00 hours 
 

Faculty members may use Major Medical (sick) Leave for the first day of absence due to 

illness.  Eligibility for use of leave is the same as staff employees except as noted below. 

 
If a nine-month faculty member or a member of the faculty member’s immediate family 

has a medical or mental health condition between the end of one academic year and the 

beginning of another (during the interim the employee is not teaching), he/she is not 

eligible for paid-leave status. 

 
If a nine-month faculty member or a member of the faculty member’s immediate family 

has a medical or mental health condition prior to the end of a contract period but has 

accrued Major Medical (sick) Leave, he/she is not eligible to be continued on a paid- 

leave status after the end of the contract period if the contract ends prior to using all 

earned leave days. 

 
For purposes of this policy, immediate family is defined as spouse, parent, stepparent, 

sibling, child, stepchild, grandchild, grandparent, son- or daughter-in-law, father- or 

mother-in-law, or brother- or sister-in-law.  Child is defined as a biological, adopted or 

foster care child, or a child from whom the individual stands or stood in loco parentis. 

 
If a faculty member is unable to begin or continue his/her teaching duties for either 

Summer or Interim Term because of illness so that he/she must be replaced or have 

his/her  courses  canceled,  his/her  contract  or  other  agreement  for  teaching  will  be 

canceled, and he/she will not be paid for the period in question. 

 
Leave utilization shall correlate with the faculty member’s employment percentage not 

their class schedule.  For example, if a faculty member is unable to perform any work 

duties for a full week, they are required to report 40 hours of leave (if full-time).  Full day 

absences will be computed as follows. 



   

 

 

Employment Percentage Daily Utilization Weekly Utilization 

50% 4 hours 20 hours 

75% 6 hours 30 hours 

100% 8 hours 40 hours 

 

 

University-wide holidays, such as Good Friday and Thanksgiving, will not count 

against sick leave time; nor will those days between the conclusion of fall semester 

examinations and the week of spring registration, or those days during the 

Spring Recess. 

 

An employee may use up to six (6) weeks of earned Major Medical (sick) Leave for the 

birth of a child or for the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster 

care and to care for the newly placed child within one (1) year of placement.  This 

provision is effective 7/1/2014.  

 
Employee absences due to a work-related injury for which temporary workers’ 

compensation disability benefits are paid shall not use accrued Major Medical (sick) Leave 

simultaneously with workers’ compensation benefits if the aggregate payments exceed one 

hundred percent (100%) of regular wages earned while in state employment at the time of 

injury.   Accrued Major Medical (sick) Leave may be used in increments fewer than eight 

(8) hours per day to constitute the difference between the amount of temporary workers’ 

compensation disability benefits received and one hundred percent (100%) of earned 

wages while in state employment at the time of injury, as calculated by Human Resources.   

 

Any employee may donate a portion of their earned Major Medical (sick) Leave to another 

employee who is suffering from a catastrophic injury or illness or to another employee who 

is caring for a member of his or her immediate family who is suffering from a catastrophic 

injury or illness, as defined in the Donated Leave policy.  The maximum amount of earned 

Major Medical (sick) Leave that an employee may donate to a qualifying recipient may not 

leave the donor employee with less than fifty percent (50%) of his or her earned Major 

Medical (sick) Leave.  Leave must be donated in twenty-four (24) hour increments.  The 

maximum amount of donated leave an employee may receive without returning to work is 

720 hours.  

 
Upon retirement from active employment, a faculty member shall be paid for no more 

than 240 hours of unused Major Medical (sick) Leave.  The term “retirement” is defined 

as follows. 

 Public Employees’ Retirement System of MS (PERS) participant:  approval to 
receive retirement benefits payable by the Public Employees’ Retirement System 

of Mississippi (PERS)  

 Optional Retirement Plan participants:  meeting eligibility requirements for 
retirement benefits as defined by the PERS 

 
Employees  participating  in  PERS  will  have  unused  Major  Medical  (sick)  Leave 



   

submitted to PERS and counted as creditable service for retirement. 

 

If a 9-month employee dies having both accumulated Major Medical (sick) and Personal 

(vacation) Leave credit, a payment shall be made to the beneficiary on record with the 

Public Employees’ Retirement System of Mississippi (PERS) or with the Optional 

Retirement Plan (ORP) vendor(s) for the total unused Personal (vacation) Leave or a 

combination of Major Medical (sick) and Personal (vacation) Leave, not to exceed two-

hundred forty (240) hours.  If the accumulated balance of Personal (vacation) Leave is 

less than two-hundred forty (240) hours, then a portion of the unused Major Medical 

(sick) Leave will be paid, up to a maximum combined payment of two-hundred forty 

(240) hours.  The employee must be eligible for retirement from the University as 

determined by the PERS in order to receive any portion of the unused Major Medical 

(sick) Leave. 

 
 


