
The University of Mississippi 
 

Professional Development for Staff Employees 
 

Summary/Purpose: Guidelines are given for awarding salary increases to permanent staff 
employees who have received either an applicable certificate, license, or degree. 
 
The University encourages the professional development of permanent staff employees.  In an 
attempt to reward employees for such efforts, salary increases may be granted for the receipt of 
applicable certificates, licenses, and degrees.  The amount of the increase varies in accordance 
with the amount of time and effort required and the relationship to the employee’s position. Part-
time employees will receive increases on a pro-rata basis. 
 
Degrees not required to be job related: 
 GED     $500 
 Associate’s Degree   $500 
 Bachelor’s Degree   $800 
 
Degrees that must be job related: 
 Eligible Certifications/Licenses $350 (maximum of 2) 
 Bachelor’s Degree   $1,000 
 Certified Public Accountant  $1,250 
 Professional Geologist Registration $1,250 
 Registered Professional Engineer $1,250 
 Registered Professional Architect $1,250 
 Master’s Degree   $1,500 
 Doctoral Degree   $2,000 
 
Salary increases granted under this policy are effective the pay period following receipt of the 
degree.   Exceptions apply to requests received within the Department of Human Resources more 
than 6 months after receipt of the degree or certification.  Salary increases for such requests will 
be effective the pay period following the date in which the Department of Human Resources 
receives the request.  To avoid delays in effecting the increase, department heads should submit 
the appropriate forms and supporting documentation in a timely manner. Increases are subject to 
the availability of departmental funds. 
 
No salary increase will be granted for receipt of a degree if the employee already has a similar 
degree (bachelor’s, master’s, etc.).     
 
Increases awarded at the documented rates are available for any certification, license, and degree 
earned and conferred on or after November 1, 2008.  Professional developments awarded prior to 
November 1 are granted at the previous amounts. 
 
Since heads of department are expected to remain current in their respective areas of 
responsibility, they will normally be ineligible for the certification provisions of this policy. 


