
The University of Mississippi 
 

Major Medical (sick) Leave for Twelve-Month Employees 
 
 

Summary/Purpose:   This  policy provides  information  regarding the  accrual  rate of 
major medical (sick) leave for permanent twelve-month employees and defines the 
guidelines concerning eligibility requirements, physician documentation, and leave 
without pay once major medical leave is exhausted. 

 
Twelve-month  permanent  full-time  employees  and  temporary  employees  who  are 
benefits eligible shall accrue Major Medical (sick) Leave in increments as follows. 
Employees who work one-half time or more will earn leave credit on a pro-rate basis. 
Accumulation amounts are unlimited. 

 
Continuous Service Monthly Accrual Rate Annual Accrual Rate 
1 month to 3 years 8 hours 96 hours 
37 months to 8 years 7 hours 84 hours 
97 months to 15 years 6 hours 72 hours 
Over 15 years 5 hours 60 hours 

 
Personal (vacation) Leave, Compensatory Leave, or Leave Without Pay must be used for 
the first eight hours of an employee’s illness or illness of a member of the employee’s 
immediate family,  except  for regularly scheduled  visits  to  a physician’s  office or  a 
hospital for the continuing treatment of a chronic disease or serious medical or mental 
health condition, as certified in advance by a physician.  For purposes of this policy, 
physician   means   a  doctor  of  medicine,   mental   health,   osteopathy,   podiatry,   or 
chiropractor. 

 
To be eligible for the use of Major Medical (sick) Leave, the employee must: 

• Have a medical or mental health condition or caring for a member of his/her 
immediate family with a medical or mental health condition. 

• Notify the department head immediately of the reason for absence 
• Keep the department head informed of his/her condition 
• Permit  the  University to  make  or  have  made  such  proper  examination  as  is 

deemed necessary 
 

For purposes of this policy, immediate family is defined as spouse, parent, stepparent, 
sibling, child, stepchild, grandchild, grandparent, son- or daughter-in-law, father- or 
mother-in-law, or brother- or sister-in-law.  Child is defined as a biological, adopted or 
foster care child, or a child from whom the individual stands or stood in loco parentis.  

 
Major  Medical  (sick)  Leave  that  causes  absences  beyond  32  hours  will  require 
certification by the attending physician.  When deemed advisable, a department may 
require a physician’s certificate for sick leave absence of any duration.  Failure to provide 
requested necessary documentation may result in “non-pay” status for the period of time 



in question, and/or in dismissal (although accrued Personal [vacation] Leave and Major 
Medical [sick] Leave exist). 

 
The University may provide, upon request, a reasonable period of time as leave of 
absence without pay (after accrued Major Medical [sick] and Personal [vacation] Leave 
are exhausted) to accompany disability sick leave for individuals who have completed 
their probationary period.    The leave of absence may be prior to or after the period of 
disability with the length of leave dependent upon the nature of disability and the length 
of employment by the individual. 

 
The University reserves the right to require a statement of medical clearance from an 
employee prior to allowing the employee to return to work. 

 
An employee may use up to six (6) weeks of earned Major Medical (sick) Leave for the 
birth of a child or for the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster 
care and to care for the newly placed child within one (1) year of placement. This 
provision is effective 7/1/2014. 
 
Any employee not returning to work at the expiration of the leave under this section is 
eligible for terminal Personal (vacation) Leave pay, as defined in the Personal Leave 
(vacation) for Twelve-Month Employees policy, provided the days have not been taken. 
 
Employee absences due to a work-related injury for which temporary workers’ 
compensation disability benefits are paid shall not use accrued Personal (vacation) and/or 
Major Medical (sick) Leave simultaneously with workers’ compensation benefits if the 
aggregate payments exceed one hundred percent (100%) of regular wages earned while in 
state employment at the time of injury.   Accrued Personal (vacation) and Major Medical 
(sick) Leave may be used in increments fewer than eight (8) hours per day to constitute the 
difference between the amount of temporary workers’ compensation disability benefits 
received and one hundred percent (100%) of earned wages while in state employment at 
the time of injury, as calculated by Human Resources.   
 
Any employee may donate a portion of their earned Personal (vacation) and/or Major 
Medical (sick) Leave to another employee who is suffering from a catastrophic injury or 
illness or to another employee who is caring for a member of his or her immediate family 
who is suffering from a catastrophic injury or illness, as defined in the Donated Leave 
policy.  The maximum amount of earned Personal (vacation) and/or Major Medical (sick) 
Leave that an employee may donate to a qualifying recipient may not exceed a number of 
days that would leave the donor employee with fewer than seven (7) days of Personal 
(vacation) and less than fifty percent (50%) of his or her earned Major Medical (sick) 
Leave.  Leave must be donated in twenty-four (24) hour increments.  The maximum 
amount of donated leave an employee may receive without returning to work is 720 hours.  
 
An employee who presents medical evidence -- and is certified by the Public Employees' 
Retirement System if eligible for retirement -- that his/her physical condition is such that 
he/she can no longer work in a capacity of state government may be paid for not more than 
960 hours of earned Major Medical (sick) Leave. 
 



Employees  participating  in  PERS  will  have  unused  Major  Medical  (sick)  Leave 
submitted to PERS and counted as creditable service for retirement. 


