
Employee Assistance – Mental Health Program 

 
Summary/Purpose:  The Employee Assistance – Mental Health Program is a counseling 

program offered through the University Counseling Center for employees of the University.  

Guidelines for participation in EAP-MH are given.   

 

This policy is in place to support the University’s objective of enhancing individual health, 

community well-being, and positive work/life balance. 

 

The Employee Assistance – Mental Health Program (EAP-MH) is a confidential service 

provided to qualifying University employees experiencing challenges with work/life situations, 

such as work related stress, interpersonal difficulties, depression, anxiety, substance abuse, and 

barriers to work productivity.   

 

Employees may receive up to four (4) consultations in a calendar year.   The first session is free 

with a nominal fee of $30 per visit for the remaining 3 sessions.  This fee will be processed as a 

payroll deduction.   Employee concerns that require more than four (4) sessions or that fall 

outside the scope of the EAP-MH practice will be provided suitable referrals with clinical 

practitioners in the community for continued assistance.   

 

With permission of the department head, employees may be absent from work, up to one (1) 

hour per week, for EAP-MH counseling services.  Services provided before or after the 

employee’s scheduled workday or during a lunch break do not require department head approval.  

Employees are not required to use accrued major medical or personal leave for EAP-MH 

consultations provided during the workday. 

 

In cases where a supervisor refers an employee, who is expected of having substance abuse 

problems or suffering from mental or emotional stress and disciplinary action may be 

forthcoming against the employee involved, an additional amount of time away from work for 

outside professional assistance other than that provided through the EAP-MH may be allowed.  

In such cases, the employee’s individual type of assistance needed, employment longevity, and 

previous work productivity will be considered; and the amount of time for assistance will be 

determined collectively by the employee’s department head, the EAP-MH counselor involved, 

and the Human Resources department head or designee.   

 

The EAP-MH program also provides psycho-educational outreach programming to the campus 

community around mental health issues and common stressors in the work environment.   

 

 

 


