
Tickets to Athletic Events 
 
Summary/Purpose:  Discounted season tickets are offered to employees and retired 
employees of the University of Mississippi and the University of Mississippi Medical 
Center (UMMC) as an extra employee benefit.  Qualifying guidelines for ordering 
discounted tickets are given for all faculty and staff. 
 
The Department of Intercollegiate Athletics is pleased to offer discounted season tickets 
to qualifying employees and retired employees of the University of Mississippi and the 
UMMC.  These tickets are considered an extra employee benefit.  In order to protect this 
program from potential misuse, the following guidelines are in effect for all faculty and 
staff renewals or new season orders for discounted tickets. 
 
The faculty or staff employee must be a full-time, permanent employee of the 
University of Mississippi or the UMMC.  Faculty/staff members who are a full-time 
permanent employees as of July 1 of the current year will be eligible.  The employee 
must be employed by the University of Mississippi or the UMMC at the time tickets are 
mailed to receive this benefit.  Retired employees are eligible if they retired from the 
University of Mississippi or the UMMC with at least 10 years of creditable service and 
they are currently drawing their retirement benefits from the State.  The status must be 
verifiable by the Athletics Department through the University’s Department of Human 
Resources. 
 
In order to receive this benefit, the employee or retired employee must meet the above 
conditions at least 60 days prior to the start of each respective season. 
 
Due to the potentially large number of qualifying employees, the Department of 
Intercollegiate Athletics reserves the right at its sole discretion to limit the number of 
discounted tickets.  The number will be reviewed on a year by year basis.   Should that 
limited number be reached during a season, discounted season ticket sales to employees 
will be stopped at the sole discretion of the Department of Intercollegiate Athletics.   
 
If the above conditions are met, each employee is eligible for up to two discounted season 
tickets in each sport for their personal use, subject to the Athletics Department guidelines 
designating which types of season tickets are available for the discount.  Individuals 
sending in order forms for the discount, who have not met the above conditions, will have 
their order returned to them with an explanation of what they must do to purchase tickets. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to offer this advantage to the University family and trust 
that these rules will be adhered to so that we can continue to offer this benefit.  Please 
contact the Athletic Ticket Office for additional information. 


