
The University of Mississippi 
Workers’ Compensation 

 
Summary/Purpose: The guidelines and requirements to receive Workers’ Compensation 
payments are given. 
 
Workers’ Compensation provides for payment for injuries and loss of time from work when 
employees, including student workers, become disabled as a result of job-related injury.  A 
Workers’ Compensation Injury Report Packet is required to determine eligibility for benefits.  
The packet includes the following forms. 
 

• MWCC – Workers’ Compensation – First Report of Injury or Illness  
• Job Preferences Form 
• Statement of Claimant 
• Authorization for Release of Health Information 

These forms must be received by the Workers’ Compensation Commission within ten (10) days 
after the first day of injury or illness.  The packet is available on the Human Resources website 
and within the Human Resources office. 

Mississippi Law provides for a penalty of up to $100 for each late report or late filing.  The 
individual responsible for any late filing of the forms will be held liable for any penalty assessed 
by the Mississippi Workers’ Compensation Commission.  To assist employees, supervisors, and 
department heads in avoiding any personal liability for this penalty, the following schedule is 
established for reporting work related injuries. 

1. Employees are to report work-related injuries to their supervisor as soon as possible, but 
no later than 24 hours after the injury or illness, excluding weekends. 

2. The injured employee or student worker shall complete the Statement of Claimant and 
the Authorization for Release of Health Information forms and submit to their department 
head or delegate. 

3. Department heads or their delegate shall complete the MWCC – Workers’ Compensation 
– First Report of Injury or Illness and the Job Preferences Forms.  These forms and those 
completed by the injured employee or student worker will be forwarded to the 
Department of Human Resources within 48 hours of the accident, excluding weekends. 

4. The Department of Human Resources will submit the forms to the University’s workers’ 
compensation insurance carrier and their office will forward information to the 
Mississippi Workers’ Compensation Commission. 

As mandated by Senate Bill 2977, effective July 1, 2008, an employee’s total compensation, as a 
combination of paid leave and indemnity payments, cannot exceed 100% of regular 
compensation.  Human Resources is responsible for calculating the maximum compensation an 
employee is eligible to receive for paid leave and to notify the employee’s department head or 
delegate of the process for submitting leave each pay period. 

 



Employees will receive verbal and written correspondence from the Department of Human 
Resources defining the policy and process. 

In the event that total compensation as a sum of paid leave and indemnity payments exceed 
regular wages, the employee is expected to return the excess amount.  The following repayment 
methods are available to the employee.  Option ‘b’ is the default method in the event of non-
selection. 

Repayment Methods: 

a) The employee can issue a personal check or money order to the University for the excess 
amount. 

b) The University will collect the overpayment via payroll deduction during the pay period 
immediately following notification from the workers’ compensation insurance carrier. 

Employees and student workers’ who suffer a work-related injury that requires treatment at the 
hospital emergency room will be required to submit to drug and alcohol testing.  Should it be 
determined that the illegal use of drugs, the use of a valid prescription medication(s) taken 
contrary to the prescriber’s instructions and/or contrary to label warnings, or intoxication due to 
the use of alcohol of the employee was the proximate cause of the injury, or if it was the willful 
intention of the employee to injure or kill himself or another, then compensation is not payable. 


