
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 7 

Reduction in Force of Staff Personnel 
 

Summary/Purpose:  In the event a reduction in workforce is deemed necessary, the procedure 

process is given including possible reasons for reduction and the rights and responsibilities of 

permanent employees who are terminated. 

 

Purpose:  

 

To create an equitable and systematic policy and procedure to be used in the event that the 

University has a need to reduce its administrative, professional and/or other staff.  

 

Scope:  

 

This policy applies to all permanent full-time and part-time administrative, professional and 

other staff employees of The University of Mississippi.  

 

Definitions for Purposes of this Policy:  

 

 1.   Dean--the administrative head of the College of Liberal Arts or one of the respective 

Schools of the University.  

 

 2.   Department Chair--a faculty member appointed to coordinate the activities of an academic  

       department and designated as the budgetary officer of the department.  

 

 3.   Department Head--an administrative employee appointed to direct the activities of a  

       non-academic department and designated as the budgetary officer of the department.  

 

 4.   Director--the administrative head of an academic unit which reports to the Provost/Vice  

       Chancellor for Academic Affairs.  

 

 5.    Job Class--the classification assigned to a group of positions which involve similar work.  

 

 6.    Permanent Employee--an employee is considered permanent if he or she is placed in a 

position considered permanent, is paid on a fixed salary or wage rate, and has successfully 

completed a probationary period. Permanence of employment is dependent upon agreement 

on terms at the beginning of employment, continued merit and fitness for the job, continued 

need for the work being done, and the availability of funds to support it.  

 

 7.    Prima Facie Case--a case established by sufficient evidence which, if not rebutted or  

        contradicted, will remain sufficient.  

 

 8.    Probationary Status--the status of a non-faculty employee during his or her first three to six  

        months (unless extended) of continuous employment in a position considered permanent.  

 

 9.    Seniority--length of continuous service with the University.  

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 7 

10.   Temporary Employee--an employee is considered temporary if at time of employment he or 

she is to be employed for no longer than twelve months and if he or she is: (a) a substitute 

for a permanent employee on a brief leave, (b) employed for a short interval during peak 

periods or for a specified length of time.  

 

Policy Statement:  

 

In the event that a reduction in workforce on the campus of The University of Mississippi is 

necessary because of adverse financial circumstance; reallocation of resources; reorganization of 

academic or administrative structures, programs or functions; curtailment of one or more 

programs or functions as the University deems appropriate; or the declaration of financial 

exigency by the Board of Trustees of State Institutions of Higher Learning, a document outlining 

the reasons for the reduction and the personnel to be affected will be developed.  

 

The primary functions of the staff of the University are to provide the best possible support for 

academic programs, the effective operation of the University, and the welfare of students. 

Therefore, the determination of those members of the staff to be terminated will be based upon 

the needs and priorities of the University or department; the performance and productivity of 

employees and their ability to contribute to the fulfillment of the University's or department's 

needs; seniority of service within the University or department; and diversity considerations of 

the University or department.  

 

The University's welfare and that of the students and faculty it serves may not be best protected 

by a proportional reduction in all areas of the University. Some categories of support services 

may be eliminated entirely while others are not reduced at all. The highest priority shall be given 

to retaining personnel necessary to maintain essential programs and functions, both academic 

and non-academic.  

 

Procedures:  

 

Should a reduction in force become necessary, the following procedures and guidelines will be 

applied:  

 

1.    The dean, director, department chair or department head will review all positions (except 

faculty) within his or her area of responsibility and provide his or her vice chancellor1 with 

the reasons for the reduction and a listing of persons recommended for termination, as well 

as comments concerning the basis for the personnel decisions, cost savings to be achieved, 

and programmatic effects of such terminations. In arriving at these recommendations, 

deans, directors, department chairs and department heads should consider: (a) the role and 

importance of the position as it relates to the goals and objectives of the department or unit; 

(b) performance and productivity of employees measured against the ultimate objective of 

providing the best programs within funding limitations; (c) the needs of faculty and 

students; (d) seniority of service within the University; and (e) effect on diversity 

considerations.  

  _____________________  

1Proposed reduction in force within the Chancellor's divisions should be made to the Chief 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 7 

of Staff to the Chancellor rather than to the Chancellor since the Chancellor serves later in 

the appeal process.  

 
     The respective vice chancellor shall review the reasons for the reductions, the recommended  

terminations, and comments accompanying each. He or she shall then submit the reduction to 

the Personnel Committee for review and endorsement. If termination is approved, the 

Director of Human Resources, after consultation with the appropriate dean, director, 

department chair or department head and receipt of an approved termination form, shall 

prepare a letter of termination to the employee in accordance with the guidelines set out 

below. This letter, accompanied by a copy of the Staff Reduction in Force Plan, shall be hand 

delivered, if possible, to the employee by his or her director, department chair or department 

head. If hand delivery is not feasible, certified mail shall be used.  

 

2.  As a rule, before any permanent, full-time employee within a department is terminated, 

temporary and probationary employees within that department will be terminated. Variations 

from this order of termination may be allowed if the head of the unit involved and the 

appropriate vice chancellor agree that termination of a specific individual or the loss of that 

person's expertise would jeopardize the continuance of program effectiveness or undermine 

the University's capability to meet institutional goals.  

 

3.    Rights of permanent employees who are terminated:  

 

       a.  Each employee who is to be terminated pursuant to this policy shall be provided a written  

            notice at least 30 days prior to termination which must contain the following information:  

 

            (1) the reason for the termination, including the reason for not retaining the particular  

                 employee;  

            (2) the effective date of the termination;  

            (3) the right to appeal the termination through the appeal procedure set forth below if   

                  received within 5 workdays of receipt of the termination notice;  

            (4) a statement regarding terms of preferential reemployment consideration.  

 

        b.   Upon termination, an employee may receive payment for up to 30 days of accrued 

Personal Leave as allowed by state law. Any unused accrued Personal Leave above 30 

days, as well as unused accrued Major Medical Leave, will be credited to the individual               

in the Retirement System.  

 

       c.   Each terminated employee has the right to preferential reemployment in the position   

             from which he or she was terminated if such should become funded and available within  

 one year from the date the employee was terminated.  

 

4.  Responsibilities of employees who are terminated.  

 

     Employees terminated pursuant to this plan who desire to receive preferential treatment in  

     reemployment must comply with the following provisions:  

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 7 

         a.  Keep the University's Department of Human Resources informed of their current 

mailing address, telephone number, or other contact information.  

 

         b.   Indicate in writing to the Director of Human Resources within 5 workdays of receipt of 

notification of the position opening his or her intent to return to employment at the 

University.  

 

         c.   Report to work no later than 5 workdays from receipt of notification of position 

opening.  

 

         d.    Failure to comply with these requirements shall constitute a waiver of preferential 

treatment in reemployment and cause the employee to be removed from the list of 

employees eligible for preferential reemployment.  

 

Appeal Procedures  

 

A staff member receiving a notice of termination pursuant to this plan has the right to appeal his 

or her termination by making a written request for an appeal to the Director of Human Resources 

within five workdays after receipt of the notice of termination. The employee's written request 

for an appeal must contain a short statement of facts which the employee believes supports his or 

her contention that termination procedures were not followed and/or other criteria were not 

properly applied.  

 

The Director of Human Resources shall present the written request for appeal to the respective 

dean, director, department chair or department head and attempt to arrange a meeting between 

that person and the aggrieved employee within two workdays after receipt of the request for 

appeal. (In the event that a dean, director, department chair or department head, because of 

unavoidable circumstances, cannot be available for an appeal meeting or hearing, his or her 

assistant or designee shall serve in the same capacity.) The dean, director, department chair or 

department head shall meet with the employee, discuss fully the basis for the termination, and 

give the employee an opportunity to present his or her complaint that termination procedures 

were not properly followed and/or appropriate criteria applied in arriving at the decision to 

terminate. The dean, director, department chair or department head shall review the decision to 

terminate and either uphold or reverse the original termination decision, notifying in writing, the 

employee, the appropriate vice chancellor, and the Director of Human Resources of his or her 

decision within two workdays of the meeting.  

 

The dean, director, department chair or department head shall review established procedures to 

determine if they were properly followed and appropriate criteria applied in arriving at the 

decision to terminate. He or she shall not review the existence of a state of financial exigency nor 

decisions of the Chancellor and vice chancellors concerning budgetary reductions, reallocations, 

reorganizations, or allocations of funding reductions to various divisions of the University.  

 

Request for Hearing  

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 7 

Within 5 workdays after receipt of a decision from the dean, director, department chair or 

department head that the termination had been upheld, the employee who has been given notice 

of termination may request the Personnel Action Review Board to review the decision to 

terminate that particular individual. The request for review must be in writing, addressed to the 

Director of Human Resources. The request shall state the grounds to be relied upon in 

challenging the propriety of the decision. Grounds for review are limited to a consideration of 

whether one or more of the following improper factors entered into the decision to terminate or 

suspend:  

 

    a.   Conduct, expressions, or beliefs on the terminated employee's part which are 

constitutionally protected.  

    b.   Improper selection of the individual to be terminated or suspended. For the purposes of 

this provision, "improper selection" occurs if material prejudice resulted from any of the 

following:  

          (1) the procedures or criteria required by the policy were not followed; or  

          (2) the decision was based upon arbitrary or capricious assumptions of fact or was arrived  

               at in an arbitrary or capricious manner.  

 

The Personnel Action Review Board shall not review the existence of financial exigency nor 

decisions of the Chancellor, vice chancellors, deans, or department heads concerning budgetary 

reductions, reallocations, reorganizations, or allocations of funding reductions to various 

divisions of the University.  

 

Review Board  

 

The Personnel Action Review Board will constitute the panel to hear the appeal. The Board 

consists of one senior administrator (department head or above), one member of the Staff 

Council and one additional member appointed by the Chancellor. The Staff Council shall 

designate five members each year for the Board. From these five, the senior administrators, and 

other employees, the Chancellor will select the Board. No member of the Board shall be from the 

department of the employee filing the appeal.  

 

The Director of Human Resources or his/her designee shall serve as the hearing officer in a 

nonvoting capacity. The Director of Human Resources will notify the other members of the 

Board and will schedule a hearing as expeditiously as possible.  

 

Hearing Procedure  

 

    a.   The Director of Human Resources shall arrange a hearing before the Board scheduled to 

hear appellate reviews during the time period in question and shall notify the employee at 

least 5 workdays in advance of the time and place of the hearing. Such hearings shall be 

held no later than ten (10) workdays after the request, except that this time limit may be 

extended by consent of the parties or by order of the board.  

 

    b.   The hearing shall be closed.  

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 6 of 7 

    c.   No staff member who participated in the decision to terminate or suspend or who is a 

material witness may serve on the Board for purposes of the review. In the event that such 

situation arises, an alternate member of the Board shall be appointed by the Chancellor.  

 

    d.   The terminated employee shall have access to the evidence on which the administration 

intends to rely to support the decision and shall be guaranteed the following procedural 

safeguards at the hearing:  

           (1) a right to be heard in his or her own behalf;  

           (2) a right to counsel or other representative, or both, but the role of such counsel or  

                representative shall be limited to an advisory capacity;  

           (3) a right to offer witnesses and documentary evidence;  

           (4) a right to question witnesses;  

           (5) a right to a verbatim record of the hearing which may be a sound recording, provided  

                 at no cost;  

           (6) written findings of fact and decision based on the hearing record.  

 

    e.   Technical rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing. The Board shall admit evidence 

having reasonable probative value and exclude evidence which is irrelevant, immaterial or 

unduly repetitious.  

 

    f.    The terminated employee shall present evidence on whether one or more of the improper 

factors specified above entered into the decision for termination. The Board shall then 

consider whether the evidence presented establishes a prima facie case that such factor or 

factors did enter significantly into the decision. If the Board finds that a prima facie case 

has not been established, the decision shall be found to have been proper and the hearing 

shall be ended. If the Board finds that a prima facie case has been established, the dean, 

director, department chair or department head, as well as the appropriate vice chancellor, 

shall be entitled to present evidence to support the decision, and, thereafter, the terminated 

employee may present evidence in rebuttal. On the basis of all the evidence presented, the 

Board shall make its determination as follows:  

 

(1) The Board shall first consider whether one or more of the above specified improper 
factors entered significantly into the decision. Unless the Board is convinced that 

such factors did significantly enter into that decision, the Board shall find the 

decision to have been proper.  

(2)   If the Board believes that improper factors may have entered into the decision but is                                        

 convinced that the same decision would have been reached had the error or errors 

not occurred, it shall find the decision to have been proper. 

 

The Board Decision  

 

Upon completion of the hearing, the Board will have 5 working days in which to make a final 

decision. The decision will be promptly communicated, in writing, to the employee and the 

administration within 5 working days by the Director of Human Resources. The Director of 

Human Resources will notify the appropriate Vice Chancellor of the Board's decision. It shall be 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 7 of 7 

the responsibility of the Vice Chancellor and department head to effect the action(s) handed 

down by the Board.  

Appeal to the Chancellor  

 

Decisions of the Board may be appealed to the Chancellor. An appeal must be filed within 5 

working days of the date the employee receives notification of the Board's decision. The appeal 

must be in writing to the Director of Human Resources. The employee will be notified within 5 

working days of the decision of the Chancellor. All decisions of the Board will be subject to 

review by the Chancellor. The decision of the Chancellor is final. There is no right of appeal to 

the Board of Trustees.  

 


