
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Solicitations in the Student Union 
 

Summary/Purpose:  This policy is for reserving space for solicitations in the Student Union. 

 

The following is the policy for reserving space for solicitations overseen by the Ole Miss Student 

Union: 

1. Solicitors are defined as individuals, companies, or groups that provide promotional or 
informational materials at a provided location in specifically designated locations. 

2. Reservations are made through the Ole Miss Student Union, where a reservation 
agreement must be completed. 

3. Available space for solicitations is restricted to the preset locations in front of both Weir 
Hall and the Lott Leadership Institute on Galtney Lott Plaza between the hours of 10:00 

a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Due to fire code and building regulations, tables may not be moved from 

assigned spaces. 

4. Space is limited to five (5) solicitors per day. Solicitors must understand that competing 
businesses could be present on day of reservation in different Student Union locations. 

5. No solicitations will be allowed outside of the reserved table location. All solicitations 
must remain at the designated table location. 

6. Due to location, absolutely no music or amplified sound is permitted at any time. 
7. There is a $175 fee per day to solicit in the designated locations on campus.  Solicitors 

requesting space for one week (five consecutive days), will be assessed a flat fee of $800.  

For solicitors that need a larger area, up to 3 booth spaces may be reserved for a fee of 

$100 per space per day. 

8. All fees must be paid at time of reservation. All payments must be in the form of cash, 
check, or Visa/MasterCard.  If the check is not properly processed by the bank, the 

reservation will be cancelled and the solicitor will not be allowed to reserve space in the 

future unless cash is paid for reservation fee. 

9. Cancellations must be made 24 hours in advance. Penalty fees may be assessed for 
solicitors failing to appear on the date(s) reserved without proper notification. ($150 

daily). 

10. There can be no solicitations or marketing that will conflict with the exclusive sales 
agreement that the University has with contracted businesses and/or corporations. This 

includes providing food or drinks that conflict with existing contracts the university has 

with vendors (e.g. non-Coca Cola products, cookies, pizza). For clarification, please 

contact the Ole Miss Student Union. 

11. There shall be no solicitation, marketing, or recruitment by credit card companies other 
than those who have official ties with The University of Mississippi. 

12. Fronting is prohibited. Fronting is when an individual or organization uses university 
space/facilities and services under the guise that the activity is a university-sponsored 

program. Violator’s will have their reservation privileges revoked. 

13. Interpretation of the regulations and their adjustment to special circumstances shall be the 
prerogative of the Ole Miss Student Union. 

14. The Ole Miss Student Union reserves the right to cancel the signed contract made with 
the solicitor.  If the solicitor has items on display, the solicitor must promptly remove all 

items and immediately leave the location.  Rental fees received will not be reimbursed. In 

the event that the university suspends campus activities or closes, the table reservation 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

will be cancelled, and the user will have the opportunity to reschedule.  

15. Failure to abide by these guidelines will result in loss of privileges. 


