
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Table Rentals for Student Organizations and University 

Departments or Organizations 
 

Summary/Purpose:  This policy is for reserving table space on campus for student 

organizations and university departments or organizations. 

 

In order to ensure that table reservations conducted on campus are in accordance with established 

policies and procedures, the Ole Miss Student Union retains the authorization to supervise and 

manage all reservations on campus.   

 

The following is the policy for reserving space for Student Organizations and Campus 

Departments: 

 

1.   Reservations are made through the Ole Miss Student Union, where the reservation agreement 

must be completed. 

 

2.   Rental is open to all registered student organizations and campus departments at no charge. 

 

3.   Space for student organizations or campus departments is available between the Lott 

Leadership Institute and Weir Hall from 9:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. during the week on Monday 

through Friday.  

 

4. Due to fire code and building regulations, tables may not be moved from assigned spaces. In  

the event of inclement weather, table reservations are at the discretion of the user. 

 

5. There can be no sales, solicitations or marketing that will conflict with the exclusive sales 

agreement that the University has with contracted businesses and/or corporations. This 

includes providing food or drinks that conflict with existing contracts the university has with 

vendors (e.g. non-Coca Cola products, cookies, and other items). For clarification, please 

contact the Ole Miss Student Union. 

 

6. Student organizations and campus departments may collect money and/or goods/items for 

charitable organizations, military personnel, etc.   

 

7.   Fronting is prohibited. Fronting is when an individual or organization uses university 

space/facilities and services under the guise that the activity is a university-sponsored 

program. Violators will have their reservation privileges revoked. 

 

8. At the discretion of the Ole Miss Student Union, student organizations and campus 

departments may forfeit their right to reserve space if they fail to appear on the date(s) 

reserved.  

 

9. Interpretation of the regulations and their adjustment to special circumstances shall be the 

prerogative of the Ole Miss Student Union. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

10. In the event that the university suspends campus activities or closes, the table reservation will 

be cancelled, and the user will have the opportunity to reschedule.  

 

11. Failure to abide by these guidelines will result in loss of privileges and/or referral to the 

Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct. 


