
The University of Mississippi 
Fiscal Misconduct 

 
Summary/Purpose: Summary/Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to show the 
application of any fiscal misconduct or suspected fiscal misconduct, involving not 
only employees, but also students and individuals or entities doing business with 
the University. 

(Revised 12/2010) 
 

The University of Mississippi is committed to achieving and maintaining the 
highest standards of moral and ethical behavior in all areas. This policy applies to 
any fiscal misconduct or suspected fiscal misconduct, involving not only 
employees, but also students and individuals or entities doing business with the 
University. 
 
Definition 
Any and all fiscal misconduct is included under this policy and includes, but is not 
limited to, such things as: 
Embezzlement, misappropriation or other financial irregularities Forgery, 
 
alteration or falsification of any university document or account  
 
Impropriety in the handling of funds or the reporting of monetary or 
financial transactions Misappropriation of university resources such as 
 
supplies, equipment, furniture, etc. 
 
Negligence in performing fiscal responsibility, including record keeping, conflict of 
interest situations, destroying or concealing records, or any similar or related 
activity. Unauthorized use of university logos or trademarks Misuse of university 
telephones, faxes, computers, etc. 
 
Unauthorized use of university facilities or resources for personal gain 
This policy will be enforced for all employees without any regard to past 
performance, length of service, title, relationship to other employees or influential 
external parties, race, religion, sex, age, disability, national origin, or veteran 
status. 
 
Responsibilities 
Administrators at all levels of management are responsible for setting the 
appropriate tone of intolerance for acts of fiscal misconduct by displaying the 
proper attitude toward complying with laws, rules, regulations, and policies, 
including ethics policies. Administrators are further responsible for detecting and 
preventing misappropriation and other irregularities constituting fiscal 
misconduct. Each member of the administration should be familiar with the types 
of improprieties that might occur within his/her area of responsibility, be alert for 



any indication of irregularity, and be aware of university policies and procedures 
and proper internal controls. Any employee or student associated with the 
University who knows or suspects fiscal misconduct has the responsibility to 
notify the Office of Internal Audit. Notification can be anonymous if the individual 
so chooses. 
Anonymous notifications must be submitted through the Internal Audit website or 
some other written form and contain relevant documentation for review. The 
reporting individual should not contact the suspected individual in an effort to 
determine facts or demand restitution; should not discuss the situation with 
anyone outside the University; and should not discuss the situation with anyone 
inside the University other than Internal Audit personnel. 
Internal Audit has the primary responsibility for reviewing allegations of fiscal 
misconduct. If the review reveals that fiscal misconduct has occurred, Internal 
Audit will work with appropriate personnel to resolve the situation. All university 
employees are to cooperate fully with those performing a review pursuant to this 
policy. 
Employees, students and others associated with the University, who in good faith 
report actual or suspected fiscal misconduct, will be protected by the 
administration from professional retaliation by those committing the actual or 
suspected fiscal impropriety. All information submitted to Internal Audit will 
be kept confidential to the extent 
possible. 
Action 
Employees suspected of perpetrating fiscal misconduct may be placed on 
suspension during the course of the investigation. Employees found to have 
participated in acts of fiscal misconduct will be subject to disciplinary action, up to 
and including termination. Human Resources, in appropriate consultation with the 
Office of the University Attorney, will determine the extent to which disciplinary 
action is warranted, in accordance with policies and procedures. 
If investigation results indicate restitution is appropriate, then restitution of the 
funds, including costs associated with the investigation when deemed 
appropriate, will be required. Criminal or civil actions may be taken against 
employees who participate in unlawful acts. 
Students found to have participated in fiscal misconduct will be subject to 
disciplinary action in accordance with the University of Mississippi M Book. 
Criminal or civil actions may be taken against those who participate in unlawful 
acts.  See, e.g., MS Code Annotate (1972) Section 31-7-55 for penalties and 
Section 31-7-57 for individual liability for unlawful expenditures. 
Individuals or entities associated with the University, found to have participated in 
fiscal misconduct as defined by this policy will be subject to review, with possible 
consequences including termination of the relationship. Criminal or civil actions 
may be taken against individuals or entities associated with the University who 
participate in unlawful acts 


