
The University of Mississippi 
 

Non-University Licensing, Certification, and/or Training Fees 
 
 

Summary/Purpose: Explanation of license, certification, and training fees eligible for 
University payment. 
 

 
Licensing and Certification Fee Payment 

The University is under no obligation to pay for licenses and certifications that are 
considered mandatory minimum requirements as defined on the official job description 
for classified positions or as advertised on unclassified position job announcements.  
Payment of fees for licenses and certifications considered mandatory minimum 
requirements is only justified if the requirement for such license or certification is 
imposed after an individual is employed. 
 
Licenses and certifications not required to obtain a position, but which must be acquired 
within a specified period of time to retain the position, are considered eligible for 
reimbursement.  Payment of fees may be paid at the discretion of the department head 
provided the availability of funds is present.  These eligible licenses and certifications are 
found on the official job description, as maintained in Human Resources, under the 
“Additional Licensure and Certification Requirements” heading.  
 
The University may elect to pay certain licensing and certification fees that do not qualify 
under the “Additional Requirements” heading of the job description when there is a 
justified need that provides a true benefit to the University.  In these situations, the 
department head must submit a justification letter to Human Resources requesting 
approval for such a payment.  This letter must include a justification stating how the 
license or certification provides a true benefit to the University and the effects that would 
result if the license or certification is not acquired.  The offices of Procurement and 
Human Resources will review the request and determine if payment will be approved.  
 

 
Non-University Training Fee Payment 

Non-University courses, training, and conference fees (i.e. continuing education) may be 
paid at the discretion of the department head if it is related to the position and provides 
true benefit to the University.  These fees are paid through Procurement Services via a 
Travel Authorization Form.  Appropriate justification must be provided directly on this 
form.  No additional paperwork needs to be completed.  
 
Reimbursement for materials and testing fees is appropriate if the materials are required 
to complete an approved training.   
 
 
 



 
Payment for Recertification 

Only licenses or certifications that qualify for payment when initially acquired (as 
defined in the “Licensing and Certification Fee Payment” section of this policy) are 
considered eligible for University-paid recertification. 
 
If an employee attends approved training and receives continuing education credits 
towards re-certification, associated fees qualify for payment as long as training is 
approved through the “Non-University Training Fee Payment” section of this policy.  If 
training is not work-related, does not provide benefit to the University, or is not approved 
by Procurement and Human Resources, the University is not responsible for payment.  
 

 
Exclusions 

The University will only pay for an individual to obtain a driver’s license or any 
specialized driver’s license when the official job description, maintained by Human 
Resources, states that the licensure is a minimum requirement of the job and must be 
acquired within a specified period of time to retain the position or to perform work tasks. 
 
Reimbursement for materials related to certification/license preparation courses are not 
covered.  
 
This policy only refers to payment for licenses, certifications, training, and examinations.  
Payment for membership dues are governed by the Procurement policy “Membership 
Dues” (PUR.AP.100.011). 


