
The University of Mississippi 

Allowable Entertainment Expenditures 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Categories and descriptions of allowable entertainment expenditures. 
 
 
Guests, Prospective Employees, and Others 
It is the policy of the University to invite appropriate prospective faculty or staff, both husband 
and wife, to visit the campus. Travel and all other reasonable and necessary expenses are 
reimbursed. When entertainment occurs on a reasonable basis associated with a recruitment visit, 
it is recognized as a proper expenditure. The faculty and staff involved in this type of 
entertainment should be essential to the interview process. When the prospective candidate’s 
spouse accompanies him/her and it is deemed necessary to have the spouse of a university 
faculty or staff member present, entertainment expenditures for the spouse may also be 
reimbursed. 
 
In certain cases, it is recognized that entertainment of official university guests is essential. 
Administrative officials, deans, department heads, or senior faculty members should usually 
undertake this entertainment. Examples of official guests include, visiting lecturers, visitors from 
foreign countries, representatives of research organizations, visitors from other universities, 
individuals interested in university programs and development of new programs (both paid and 
non-paid consultants), and business and community leaders in Oxford, other Mississippi 
communities, and the State at large who are on campus for specific business on behalf of the 
University. The relationship between the visitor and the university faculty or staff members 
attending the function or their areas of responsibility must be clearly indicated. 
 
In the case of conferences, workshops, meetings, and seminars conducted by the University and 
supported by income from registration fees, allowable entertainment expenses will be 
reimbursed. "Covered by Program Income" should be notated on the Request for Payment form. 
Conferences, workshops, meetings, seminars, retreats, etc., that are not supported by fees may be 
organized around university groups in combination with outside persons or groups limited to 
university personnel. Meal or refreshment expenses associated with these groups will require 
assurance, through appropriate documentation, that the function is essential to the operation of 
the University and that provision of meals/refreshments must be incidental to the function rather 
than the primary purpose of the function. Meals held subsequent to a business function are not 
allowable uses of university funds. 
 
Retirement Receptions 
University funds may be used, at the department head’s discretion, to purchase refreshments for 
employee retirements. All university employees must be invited to attend. University funds can 
also be used for campus-wide notification of the event. University funds cannot be used to 
purchase gifts for retiring employees. 
 
Official University Functions 
Official university functions and receptions held by the Chancellor for employees, students, 
alumni, and friends of the University. 
 

Page 1 of 2 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

Official Student Functions 
• Official college/school functions and receptions for students and their families in 

conjunction with academic achievements or recruiting shall be reimbursed as 
entertainment. Such occasions include, but are not limited to, graduation, Honors Day, 
School of Accountancy Day, Engineering Day, and Homecoming. 

• End-of-the-Academic-Year awards banquets or receptions given by university student 
groups whose emphasis is directed toward benefiting the general student population. 
Such groups include student governing boards, University Programs, etc. 

• The University recognizes that student-housing residents have needs beyond those of 
commuter students. To support their needs, Student and Residence Life provide funds 
aimed at the development of the whole student. Entertainment expenses for residence hall 
functions that address this goal are allowable, providing that Housing explains the 
relationship between the expenses and the criteria they have established for the 
development of the whole student. 

 


