
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Utility Carts  

Summary/Purpose:  Defines guidelines for the use of Utility Carts on campus.  

All Utility Carts and Utility Vehicles used for intra-campus administrative travel must be 

ordered and painted in "classic blue”. Any color variation from this policy must be approved in 

advance by the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance. The only exception is 

Landscape Services carts that are generally green.  

All carts must have strobe lights, reflective tape, turn signals, head/tail/stop lights, and a 

unique security key when purchased.  If unavailable at purchase, departments should have 

Facilities Management install all the safety features mentioned above. Property Control will 

conduct audits to verify that all carts are uniformly marked on the sides with "The University 

of Mississippi" decals from the Facilities Management Sign Shop, and that all safety features 

are installed and in working order.  Carts that are lacking any of the working safety features 

will be referred to the University Service Station for repairs.    

Fuel must be purchased at the University Service Station. Facilities Management can provide 

minor services, some repairs, and replace batteries for electric carts.  A special ignition key can 

be requested from Facilities Management.  For added security, Facilities Management can also 

install a “kill” switch to disable the cart when not in use.  

Departments should be mindful of who operates their carts and how much training they have 

received. Cart operators are required to follow all traffic rules and regulations and are required to 

operate their carts in accordance with University Policy.  Pedestrians have the right of way in all 

instances. Travel on sidewalks should be kept to a minimum and driving or parking on the grass 

should be avoided.  Utility Carts should be parked in a secure location or in a way that does not 

hamper pedestrian or other vehicular traffic.  

Departments owning and using Utility Carts are responsible for satisfying the following 

reporting requirements.  Cart operators must possess a valid driver’s license.  Upon given 

permission to operator a cart, drivers must provide a photocopy of a valid driver’s license to the 

department owning or using the cart.  Departments must maintain photocopies of driver’s 

licenses of all employees authorized to operate a cart and on an annual basis, the driver’s 

licenses must be validated. 

Carts operating on campus streets should pull over when safe to allow for the passage of 

automobiles. Carts should not be overloaded or operated with more passengers than designed to 

be carried in the vehicle.  

No privately owned Utility carts are allowed on campus regardless of the circumstance or 

event unless prior approval is granted by the administration.   

Having a cart to use is a privilege. Departments that fail to follow the rules and policies are 

subject to having their carts impounded by Campus Security (UPD) or having them banned from 

campus.  To ensure vehicle safety, the University highly encourages all cart owners to have carts 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

inspected, at a minimum, once per year.  The University Service Station or authorized dealers 

may do the inspections.  Carts found to be unsafe may be impounded until properly repaired.  

 


