
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Fire Services 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To provide guidance to the University Community on issues regarding fire 
safety. 
 

GENERAL  

The Facilities Management Department manages University Fire Services.  University Fire 

Services will inspect all buildings, conduct fire drills at dormitories and Greek houses, conduct 

training as requested, assist in determining fire origination and cause involving University owned 

property and advise on issues regarding fire safety. 

Enforcement of any policies, standards or fire codes will be conducted by University 

Administration and/or the State Fire Marshal’s Office. 

 

FIRE FIGHTING SERVICES 

 

On the University of Mississippi campus, fire fighting services are contracted with the City of 

Oxford. 

 

RESPONSIBILITY OF BUILDING OCCUPANTS IN THE EVENT OF A FIRE ALARM 

All occupants are required to leave the building when a fire alarm sounds or during a fire drill.  

Occupants evacuating a building should not use elevators.  Occupants should use the stairwells.  No 

one should re-enter the building until authorized to do so by fire officials.  Once out of the building, 

report the fire location by dialing 911 or by notifying University Police by dialing 662-915-7234 on 

a cell phone or by using a phone in another building.  Malicious tampering with building fire 

alarms, fire protection systems or fire extinguishers is prohibited.  Violators are subject to 

disciplinary action, monetary fine or both. 

FIRE SAFETY INSPECTIONS   

University Fire Inspectors will conduct fire safety inspections on Academic, Auxiliary and Athletic 

buildings once each year.  Inspections at UM Housing Facilities and Greek houses are conducted 

once in the fall semester by the State Fire Marshal’s Office.  Any violations of the University Policy 

on Fire Safety, International Fire Code or of the National Fire Protection Association Codes and 

Standards, found at the time of inspection, will be documented and reported to the appropriate 

individual(s) for correction. 

Greek House Corporations are responsible for correcting deficiencies within their respective 

houses and maintaining current certification of fire alarm and sprinkler systems to meet existing 

state laws, university policies and fire codes. 

 

If the Fire Inspectors find any violation that they believe represents a danger to life and limb, 

they may advise that the building be vacated and closed until the violation is corrected.  In some 

cases, the Fire Inspectors may determine that posting a “Fire Watch” may be an acceptable 

alternative to closing a building. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

 

 

FIRE DRILLS 

Fire Drills will be conducted once in the fall semester and once in the spring semester for all 

dormitories and Greek houses. 

 

Fire Drills will be conducted at any other building upon written request by the respective 

deans/chairs/directors/building mayors. 

 

FIRE ALARMS AT GREEK HOUSES 

 

State law requires each Greek House on University property to have an NFPA 72 operational and 

monitored fire alarm system.  It is the Greek organizations’ responsibility to be in compliance 

with the National Fire Code (NFPA) Standard 72 as published by the National Fire Protection 

Association.  Greek organizations are required by the University of Mississippi, to have their fire 

alarm systems inspected and tested annually to ensure the systems are operating properly.  Greek 

Houses are responsible for any maintenance, repairs, phone line expenses, and testing that is 

related to their systems.  University Fire Services and Facilities Management Department are 

unable to provide maintenance on Greek fire alarm systems.  Greeks are required to contact their 

alarm monitoring and maintenance companies for periodic testing of systems as required by 

University policy.  Greeks are encouraged to purchase maintenance contracts on fire alarm 

systems from certified service providers. 

 

Greek Houses assume full responsibility for any circumstances resulting from the fire alarm 

systems’ failure to meet University Policy, State Laws or fire codes as established. 

 

FIRE ALARM MONITORING SERVICE 

 

The Facilities Management Department has a 24 hour, 7 day per week Dispatch Office that 

monitors automated fire alarms in academic, auxiliary and athletic buildings.  Not all campus 

buildings have automated fire alarm systems. 

 

The Facilities Management Department does not monitor Greek fire alarm systems. 


