
The University of Mississippi 

Sexual Harassment Policy 

 

The University of Mississippi is committed to fostering an environment that prevents sexual harassment of 

employees, students, applicants for admission or employment, visitors to campus, or third parties who are 

participants in the University of Mississippi programs or activities. The University is also committed to 

professionalism, fostered by an atmosphere of mutual trust and respect. These commitments are threatened 

when persons in positions of authority abuse the trust placed in them. The purpose of this policy is to explain 

sexual harassment violations, including, but not limited to, sexual assaults and other types of sexual violence. 

This policy also outlines discrimination and disparate treatment violations, as well as retaliation. Further, this 

policy provides reporting procedures and relevant sanctions. 

The University of Mississippi adheres to the guidelines set forth by Title IX of the Education Amendments of 

1972. For a broader overview of the University of Mississippi's policy concerning harassment by a student, 

see University Sexual Misconduct Policy DSA.DS.200.075. For university policy covering consensual 

relationships, see Consensual Relationships ACA.EO.lOO.Oll. 

The University of Mississippi prohibits sexual harassment, sexual assault, and other forms of unwelcome 

sexual contact in order to protect students, faculty, and staff. 

Sexual harassment includes unwelcome sexual advances, "requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or 

physical conduct of a sexual nature when: (1) Submission to or rejection of such conduct is either an explicit 

or implicit term or condition of, or is used as the basis for decisions affecting an individual's employment or 

advancement in employment, evaluation of academic work or advancement in an academic program, or basis 

for participation in any aspect of a University program or activity (quid pro quo); and/or (2) Such conduct 

has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's access to the University or an 

individual's work environment or are so objectively offensive, pervasive, or severe that they effectively deny 

the victim access to the University of Mississippi's resources and opportunities (hostile environment). 

A wide range of behaviors may qualify as sexual harassment, up to and including sexual assault. Some types of 

actions that may rise to the above level and constitute sexual harassment include: 

• treating others differently based on their gender, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or gender 

expression 

• verbal harassment or abuse of a sexual nature 

• subtle pressure for sexual activity 

• sexist remarks about a person's clothing, body, or sexual activities 

• unwanted touching, patting, or pinching 

• demanding sexual favors accompanied by implied or overt threats concerning one’s job or working 

conditions 

• inappropriate display of sexually suggestive or pornographic materials 

• sexual assault or other types of sexual violence 

 

 

 



The University of Mississippi does not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, color, gender, sex, 

pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, religion, citizenship, national origin, age, 

disability, veteran status, or genetic information. Further, both men and women are protected from sex 

discrimination and sex-based harassment. 

 

Employees, students, applicants for admission or employment, or other participants in University of 

Mississippi programs or activities who believe they have been discriminated against are entitled to seek relief 

through the EORC Office or Title IX Coordinator. This contact information is provided below. 

 

Retaliation against an individual who initiates a complaint, participates in an investigation, or pursues legal 

action, is prohibited. The University defines retaliation as any adverse action (including intimidation) taken 

against an individual who has participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under 

these policies and procedures. Retaliation may occur in person or electronically. 

 

If any employees or students believe that they have been subjected to sexual harassment or need to report 

under this policy, they should immediately report to the Title IX Coordinator. Such incidents may also be 

reported to the University Police Department, the immediate supervisor, or to the Office of the Dean of 

Students. 

 

All complaints of sexual harassment, whether verbal or written, should be submitted to the 

University of Mississippi's Title IX Coordinator at the following address: 

 

Honey Ussery 

Title IX Coordinator Post Office Box 1848 

270 D Martindale Student Services Center 

Phone: 662-915-7045 

Fax: 662-915-1229 

titleix@olemiss.edu or hbussery@olemiss.edu 

 

Responsible employees must report any allegation of discrimination on the basis of sex, including sexual 

harassment, to the Title IX Coordinator immediately. Responsible employees include all University faculty 

and staff members, except those who work or volunteer in the on campus Violence Prevention Office and 

those with statutory privilege, including but not limited to those providing counseling or health care services 

through the University Counseling Center, Student Health Services, and/or Psychological Services Center. 

 

If there are indications that a possible crime is being committed or someone is in immediate danger of 

physical harm, the University Police Department should be notified immediately. The Title IX Coordinator 

should then be notified consistent with the preceding paragraph. 

 

The Title IX Coordinator will handle matters with as much confidentiality as permitted by law. Sexual 

harassment allegations brought to the attention of the Title IX Coordinator will be processed in accordance 

with the Student Conduct Adjudication Process Policy when the complaint is against a student or the Non-

Discrimination and Complaint Procedure Policy in all other situations. 

 

If it is determined that sexual harassment has occurred, corrective action will be taken. Depending upon the 

circumstances, this corrective action may include a reprimand, demotion, discharge, student conduct charges, 

or other appropriate action. 

mailto:hbussery@olemiss.edu

