
 

The University of Mississippi 
 

Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action 
 
 

 
Summary/Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to define the procedure for insuring 

compliance with federal regulations. 

 

It is the policy of the University of Mississippi to provide equal opportunity in any employment 

practice, education program or education activity to all qualified persons. The University 

complies with all applicable laws regarding equal opportunity and affirmative action and does 

not unlawfully discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of 

race, color, gender, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, religion, 

citizenship, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or genetic information. This policy 

extends to recruitment, employment, promotion, demotion, transfer, lay-off, termination, 

compensation, training, benefits and all other terms and conditions of employment. 

 

Employment opportunities will not be distinguished on the basis of gender unless gender is a 

bona fide occupational qualification. Employment opportunities will not be distinguished on the 

basis of age except where age is reasonably taken into account as a factor necessary to the 

normal operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity 

administered by the University. 

 

The University wil l  take affirmative action to recruit, employ, and to advance in employment 

persons who are members of groups that are underrepresented and/or underutilized in the 

University workforce, including but not limited to minorities, women, individuals with 

disabilities, disabled veterans, and other protected veterans, including recently separated 

veterans, active duty, wartime, or campaign badge veterans, armed forces service medal veterans. 

Reasonable accommodations will be made for otherwise qualified disabled veterans and other 

persons with disabilities. 

 

The University of Mississippi is a place where equal opportunity for faculty, staff and students is 

welcomed and embraced both in spirit and in law. The University's commitment is an 

institutional commitment. Positive results are expected from signatory officers and supervisors 

whose employment decisions have a direct impact on the attainment of the University’s 

affirmative action goals. 

 

Complaints by faculty members, staff or students should be directed to Becki Bressler, Director of 

Equal Opportunity and Regulatory Compliance, Post Office Box 1848, 217 Martindale Student 

Services Center, (662) 915-7735, eeo@olemiss.edu. 

mailto:eeo@olemiss.edu

