
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Student Organization Fund Use Agreement 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The Office of International Programs (OIP) facilitates access to funds awarded to 
international student organizations by the Associated Student Body (ASB).  University of Mississippi 
international student organizations who are officially recognized by the Dean of Students Office may 
apply for ASB funding per the policies set forth for all on-campus student organizations. ASB awards will 
be transferred to the OIP account assigned to the student group. Such funds can be accessed per the below 
guidelines by presenting an invoice for payment or by applying for reimbursement of costs. All purchases 
will be reviewed by OIP. Payment will be issued only for qualifying items.   
 
 
The following guidelines apply: 
 

 University rules for use of funds must be followed. Restricted items such as, but not limited 
to, alcohol, tobacco, gifts, etc. may not be purchased. See university policy 10000533 
Inappropriate Use of Funds- Spending for additional information. 

 Receipts must be itemized. The purchaser must ensure that all receipts are itemized prior to 
submission to OIP. 

 Itemized receipts or invoices including the name of the organization, the student contact’s 
name, mailing address, and ID number must be given to the OIP Administrative Coordinator, 
the International Student Advisor, or an OIP staff member. Keep a photocopy of the 
information and receipts.  

 A guest list is required for functions; however large community events where attendees come 
and go at will are exempt from the guest list requirement. 

 Tax must not be paid when purchasing items; inform the clerk at the store where a purchase is 
being made that you are a university student organization, and give them the Tax I.D. number 
(available from OIP office). Wal-Mart has a special Tax I.D. card that you must use at its 
stores; the card may be checked out from OIP. 

 When large expenditures are being requested make sure sufficient funds are in your group’s 
account. The purchase cannot be authorized unless sufficient funds are in the account even in 
cases when other departments have agreed to transfer money into your account at a later date.  

 If you have questions, ask the International Student Adviser PRIOR to the purchase. 

 
 


