
Approved by URB; February 14, 2011 

 

The University of Mississippi 
 
Definition and Eligibility for serving as Principal Investigator (PI) / Project Director (PD) 

or Co-PI / Co-PD 
 
Summary/Purpose: Definitions of PI/PD and Co-PI/Co-PD; and who can serve in these 
capacities on an externally sponsored project at UM. 
 
The Principal Investigator (or Project Director) of an externally sponsored project is the 
individual responsible for (1) the conduct of research, training, service, or other activity 
described in the proposal for the externally sponsored program, (2) fiscal management of the 
project, (3) all associated reporting requirements, and (4) maintenance of all related 
programmatic records. 
 
The PI/PD of an externally sponsored project must be a permanent employee (faculty member or 
staff member) of the University at the time of sponsored program award acceptance and project 
execution. S/He must also be a permanent employee of the University at the time of proposal 
submission; however, the Department Head and Dean may request a waiver for such individuals 
that do not meet this requirement, such as newly hired faculty or staff. Approval by the Vice 
Chancellor for Research and Sponsored Programs is required. 
 
The Department Head and Dean of the performing unit may recommend an individual who holds 
one of the following positions as a PI/PD: Adjunct faculty, Visiting faculty/staff, Post-Doctoral 
fellows/employees, or Emeritus faculty. Approval by the Vice Chancellor for Research and 
Sponsored Programs is required, and such requests are granted for a single submission only (or 
subsequent resubmission). 
 
A Co-PI / Co-PD is: 
1)  a collaborator with the PI who can take over the project in the absence of the PI, or 
2)  the lead on a sub-project contained within the larger proposed project. 
 
A Co-PI (or Co-PD) must be either 1) a permanent UM employee, and meet the same 
requirements for a PI/PD as described above, or 2) an employee of another entity with which 
UM has (or will put in place) a formal contractual relationship covering the specific sponsored 
project.  Individual consultants who do not have an employer/employee relationship with either 
an affiliate entity or a UM contractor/consulting organization may not serve as a Co-PI.   
 
 
 


