
The University of Mississippi 
 

Credential File Service 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To describe the policies and procedures for establishing credential files and 
for using the service.   
 
What is a credential file? 
 
A credential file contains information about a student’s education and work experience which 
may be of interest to potential employers.  Having a credential file eliminates the student’s need 
to repeatedly request letters of recommendation from professors and previous employers, and 
allows the student’s credentials to be mailed in a confidential, professional, and efficient manner. 
 
Who needs a credential file? 
 
Credential files are used most frequently by students and alumni who are seeking employment as 
faculty or administrators in elementary, secondary, and higher education.  However, credential 
files are also helpful to any students who are applying to graduate school or who are applying for 
fellowships and internships. 
 
What does a credential file contain? 
 
A credential file may include any or all of the following: 
 

• Resumes 
• Curriculum vita (CVs) 
• Letters of recommendation 
• Unofficial transcripts 
• Teaching Certifications 
• Student Evaluations 
• Test scores 
• Writing samples 
• Dissertation abstracts 

 
How to establish a Credential File 
 
The Career Center has partnered with Interfolio, Inc. to offer an electronic delivery service that 
provides greater convenience and accessibility to users.  Interfolio will allow users to create an 
electronic portfolio for on-line management of credentials, with 24-hour accessibility.  Interfolio 
is self-managed, allowing users to make requests at their convenience.  This service will process 
delivery requests within one (1) business day.  In addition, Intefolio provides the capability of 
storing confidential documents on file, allowing the user to choose whether to hold the document 
(i.e., recommendation letter) confidential, or retain the right to review it. 
 
To create a credentials account with Interfolio, visit http://www.interfolio.com.  New users will 
create a profile for their account and will then be able to build portfolios immediately. 
 

Page 1 of 2 

http://www.interfolio.com/


The University of Mississippi 
 

The fees for establishing an account are based on a one-year, five-year, or a ten-year plan.  
Additional fees will be assessed for each mailing requested.  Multiple forms of payment are 
accepted, including credit cards, checks, and money orders.  For details regarding the pricing 
schedule, please visit http://www.interfolio.com.  
 
Inactive Credential Files 
 
Credential files that have been inactive for a period of five years will be destroyed.  Every effort 
will be made to contact file holders before credential files are destroyed.  This applies to paper 
files that were established and stored in the Career Center prior to June 1, 2007.  
 
Inactive credential files may be transferred to Interfolio, at the file holder’s expense, by 
submitting a transfer request, in writing.  Please contact the Career Center for additional 
information regarding the transfer of inactive files. 
 
Please note:  The prices, policies, and procedures outlined above are all subject to change 
without notice.  Contact the Career Center at 915.7174, for inquiries related to the 
Credential Files service. 
 
  
 

Page 2 of 2 

http://www.interfolio.com/

	How to establish a Credential File

