
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 4 

Reporting Research Animal Concerns 
 

Summary/Purpose: To provide procedures for reporting and investigating concerns about 
substandard research animal care or noncompliant research animal use. 
 
I.   POLICY 
 

A. Purpose   
 
1. The University of Mississippi strives to uphold the highest standards for care and use 

of research animals. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) has 
several routine oversight and monitoring procedures, based on federal regulations and 
AAALAC guidelines, for assuring these standards are met. This policy affords an 
additional means of care and use oversight – reporting by any person of perceived 
sub-standard care or noncompliant research animal use. This policy follows the 
federal regulations cited in B. below, which include protections for individuals who 
report concerns. 

 
2. Concerned persons should consider first expressing their concerns directly to 

laboratory personnel involved with the animals or research in question in order to 
resolve the concerns.  However, even when concerns are resolved in such a manner, 
they may still be reported as described below. 

 
B. Pertinent Regulations 
 

1. “The IACUC shall... review, and, if warranted, investigate concerns involving the 
care and use of animals at the research facility resulting from public complaints 
received and from reports of noncompliance received from laboratory or research 
facility personnel or employees.” Animal Welfare Act [9 CFR §2.31(c) (4)]. 

 
2. The University will ensure that individuals reporting deficiencies in animal care and 

treatment are not discriminated against or subject to any reprisal for reporting 
violations of regulations or standards. Animal Welfare Act [9 CFR §2.32(c) (4)]. 

 
 
II.   DEFINITIONS 
 

A. Good Faith Research Animal Concern Allegation means an Allegation made with the 
honest belief that noncompliance or sub-standard care may have occurred. An Allegation 
is not in good faith if it is made with reckless disregard for or willful ignorance of facts 
that would disprove the Allegation. 

 
B. Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) is the committee charged with 

oversight of animal research and compliance with federal and state regulations. 
 

C. Institutional Official is the Vice Chancellor of Research and Sponsored Programs. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 4 

 
D. Research Animal Concern Allegation means an observation of perceived sub-standard 

care or noncompliant use of research animals concern which is communicated to an 
IACUC official orally or in writing. 

 
E. Respondent means the person against whom a Research Animal Concern Allegation is 

directed or the person whose actions are the subject of the allegation. There can be more 
than one Respondent. 

 
F. Retaliation means any action that adversely affects the employment or other institutional 

status of an individual that is taken by the institution or an employee because the 
individual has in good faith made a Research Animal Concern Allegation or of 
inadequate institutional response thereto.   

 
G. Whistleblower means a person who makes a Research Animal Concern Allegation. 

 
 
 

III.   PROCEDURES 
 

A. Submitting a Research Animal Concern Allegation  
Concerns can be submitted anonymously, in person, in writing, or electronically to the 
Attending Veterinarian, the IACUC Chair, or the Institutional Official. At any time, an 
employee, student, or other observer may consult about research animal concerns and 
about reporting those concerns with any of these individuals. 
 

B. Dissemination of Reporting Procedures  
To assure that institutional employees are aware of the process for reporting concerns, the 
reporting procedures along with the name and contact information of the Attending 
Veterinarian, IACUC Chair and Institutional Official are posted in the University’s 
animal facilities and on the IACUC website. 

 
C. Initial Review of a Research Animal Concern Allegation  

The IACUC Chair will present the Research Animal Concern Allegation to the IACUC 
Executive Committee (IEC), which includes the IACUC Chair, the Attending 
Veterinarian, the IACUC Research Compliance Specialist, and the Director of Research 
Integrity and Compliance for review to determine whether there are sufficient grounds to 
warrant an investigation. (All IEC members are members of the IACUC.)  

 
D. Investigative Procedures and Outcomes 
 

1. IACUC members who have a conflict of interest will recuse themselves from all 
procedures. 

 
2. The IEC will inform the IACUC of all allegations and whether an investigation is 

warranted.   



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 4 

 
3. The Respondent(s) will be asked to attend investigation meetings to provide a 

response to the Allegation.  
 
4. Results of the investigation will be presented to the IACUC in writing with 

recommendations for action.  The IACUC will review the final actions. 
 
5. Findings verifying noncompliant use of research animals will result in administrative 

actions to bring animal use and care into compliance through remedial education or 
other means and/or suspension of the research in accordance with AWA or PHS 
regulations. The IACUC will report verified concerns considered severe or continuing 
to the Institutional Official and to USDA and/or OLAW through the Institutional 
Official, if warranted. The Institutional Official may recommend sanctions 
commensurate with the noncompliance portions of the IACUC SOP Handbook.  

 
E. Notification  

When a decision on the Allegation has been reached at the initial review stage, the 
IACUC Chair will notify: the Whistleblower (if not anonymous), the Respondent(s), the 
IACUC, and the Institutional Official. When a final decision on the Allegation has been 
reached after the investigation stage, the IACUC Chair will notify: the Whistleblower (if 
not anonymous), the Respondent, and the Institutional Official. 

 
 
IV.   PROTECTIONS 

 
A. Confidentiality  

Any identifying information provided by a Whistleblower will be kept confidential by all 
individuals involved in the review and/or investigation.  

 
B. Protecting the Whistleblower  

The Director of Research Integrity and Compliance will monitor the treatment of 
institutional employees and students who bring Research Animal Concern Allegations or 
of inadequate institutional response thereto, and those who participate in investigations. 
The Director of Research Integrity and Compliance will ensure that these persons will not 
be retaliated against in the terms and conditions of their employment or other status at 
The University and will review instances of alleged Retaliation for appropriate action.     
 
Employees and students should immediately report any alleged or apparent Retaliation to 
the Director of Research Integrity and Compliance. The institution will also protect the 
privacy of those who report Research Animal Concern Allegations in good faith to the 
maximum extent possible. For example, if the Whistleblower requests anonymity, the 
institution will make an effort to honor the request during the Allegation initial review or 
investigation within applicable policies and regulations and state and local laws, if any. 
The University will undertake diligent efforts to protect the positions and reputations of 
those persons who, in good faith, make Allegations. 
 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 4 

C. Protecting the Respondent 
Investigations will be conducted in a manner that will ensure fair treatment to the 
Respondent(s) and confidentiality to the extent possible without compromising the 
investigation.  If the investigation finds no noncompliance, the Director of Research 
Integrity and Compliance will undertake reasonable efforts to restore the Respondent’s 
reputation.  Depending on the particular circumstances, the Director of Research Integrity 
and Compliance will consider notifying those individuals aware of or involved in the 
investigation of the final outcome. 
 
 

V.   ALLEGATIONS 
 

D. Good Faith Allegations  
If the investigation finds that the Allegation merits no corrective action or sanctions, but 
was made in “good faith,” the investigation will conclude. No further action will be 
taken. 

 
E. Allegations Not Made in Good Faith  

A Research Animal Concern Allegation not made in “good faith” will be handled in 
accordance with established University policies and procedures.  

 
 

VI.   RECORDKEEPING  
 
Details of the Good Faith Research Animal Concern Allegation, results of the review of 
the Allegation, and results of the investigation, if any, will be documented on the Animal 
Welfare Concerns Report form.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
 Animal Welfare Act [9 CFR §2.31(c) (4)] 
 Animal Welfare Act [9 CFR §2.32(c) (4)] 
 PHS Policy II 
 U.S. Government Principle I 

 


	I.   POLICY
	A. Purpose
	1. The University of Mississippi strives to uphold the highest standards for care and use of research animals. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) has several routine oversight and monitoring procedures, based on federal regulation...
	2. Concerned persons should consider first expressing their concerns directly to laboratory personnel involved with the animals or research in question in order to resolve the concerns.  However, even when concerns are resolved in such a manner, they ...
	B. Pertinent Regulations
	1. “The IACUC shall... review, and, if warranted, investigate concerns involving the care and use of animals at the research facility resulting from public complaints received and from reports of noncompliance received from laboratory or research faci...
	2. The University will ensure that individuals reporting deficiencies in animal care and treatment are not discriminated against or subject to any reprisal for reporting violations of regulations or standards. Animal Welfare Act [9 CFR §2.32(c) (4)].
	IV.   PROTECTIONS
	A. Confidentiality
	Any identifying information provided by a Whistleblower will be kept confidential by all individuals involved in the review and/or investigation.
	B. Protecting the Whistleblower
	The Director of Research Integrity and Compliance will monitor the treatment of institutional employees and students who bring Research Animal Concern Allegations or of inadequate institutional response thereto, and those who participate in investigat...
	Employees and students should immediately report any alleged or apparent Retaliation to the Director of Research Integrity and Compliance. The institution will also protect the privacy of those who report Research Animal Concern Allegations in good fa...
	C. Protecting the Respondent
	Investigations will be conducted in a manner that will ensure fair treatment to the Respondent(s) and confidentiality to the extent possible without compromising the investigation.  If the investigation finds no noncompliance, the Director of Research...
	V.   ALLEGATIONS
	D. Good Faith Allegations
	If the investigation finds that the Allegation merits no corrective action or sanctions, but was made in “good faith,” the investigation will conclude. No further action will be taken.
	E. Allegations Not Made in Good Faith
	A Research Animal Concern Allegation not made in “good faith” will be handled in accordance with established University policies and procedures.
	VI.   RECORDKEEPING
	Details of the Good Faith Research Animal Concern Allegation, results of the review of the Allegation, and results of the investigation, if any, will be documented on the Animal Welfare Concerns Report form.
	References:
	 Animal Welfare Act [9 CFR §2.31(c) (4)]
	 Animal Welfare Act [9 CFR §2.32(c) (4)]
	 PHS Policy II
	 U.S. Government Principle I

