
The University of Mississippi 
 

WAIVER OF IRB APPLICATION FOR CLASS PROJECTS 

 

Summary/Purpose: To offer instructors who assign class projects using humans (who are not 

enrolled in the class) as subjects an alternative to requiring each student to submit an IRB 

application. 

 

It is the University of Mississippi IRB’s policy to review all research conducted by faculty, staff, and 

students. The IRB must determine if studies meet the Code of Federal Regulations definition of 

“Research,” which requires a formal IRB application. Many class-assigned projects using humans as 

subjects do not meet the criteria in the federal definition of research (i.e., “a systematic investigation, 

including research development, testing and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to 

generalizable knowledge”). In some of these cases, classroom projects may not require an IRB 

application. 

 

To minimize administrative burdens on instructors and students, the IRB offers instructors an 

alternative to requiring each student to submit an IRB application, provided that both NONE of the 

conditions in A below are met and that the instructor agrees to fulfill ALL responsibilities in B. 

 

A.Waiver of IRB Application for Class Projects is prohibited when the study meets one or 

more of the following conditions: 

 

1.Publication or presentation outside of the University of Mississippi. Data obtained from 

this class project CANNOT be used for publication, presentation at a professional meeting, or used in 

thesis/dissertation research. 

 

2.Use of vulnerable populations or participants under the age of 18, except on a case by case 

basis determined by the IRB Executive Committee. The project(s) cannot involve participants 

under 18, prisoners, or persons lacking the capacity to give informed consent (e.g., mentally disabled, 

under the influence of drugs or alcohol, etc.). Exception for participants under 18: Research 

conducted in established or commonly accepted educational settings, involving normal educational 

practices, such as: research on regular and special education instructional strategies, or research on 

the effectiveness of, or the comparison among instructional techniques, curricula, or classroom 

management methods. 

 

3.Risk more than “Minimal Risk.” “Minimal risk” is when “the probability and magnitude of harm 

or discomfort in the research are not greater in and of themselves that those ordinarily encountered in 

daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.” 

[45CFR 46.102(i)] Videotaping may exceed minimal risk and will be evaluated on a case by case 

basis. 

 

4.Use of deception. The class project may not include deception of any kind (e.g., omission of 

information, misleading instructions, etc.). All subjects must be fully informed of the nature of the 

project, its risks and benefits, and give voluntary consent to participate (when applicable). 

 

B.Instructors granted a class project waiver must accept primary responsibility for 

ensuring the rights and welfare of the human subjects. Instructors must: 



 

1. Train students in the proper conduct of research and the protection of human subjects. 

To supplement classroom instruction on research ethics, the IRB requires instructors to have 

students complete Human Subjects Ethics Quiz after they study the “What is Human Subjects 

Research?” education materials.  Instructors must require 100% correct quiz answers.  Instructors 

must complete the CITI Basic Course. 

 

2.Review Student Class Project Applications and determine if each project qualifies for a 

waiver. The IRB does not review these applications. Instructors are responsible for keeping 

all paperwork associated with the course for a period of one calendar year. 
. 

3.Ensure that students get informed consent from subjects and assent from children when 

applicable. See the IRB Forms page for sample consent and assent forms for class projects. 

 

4.Review all methods and instruments used in each project. 

 

5.Document that students receive permission to conduct research at institutions/places other 

than The University of Mississippi. This includes written permission from someone authorized to 

permit the research, for example: letters from school authorities, pharmacy managers, or store 

owners. 

 

Procedures 

 

1.Instructor submits Request for Class Project Waiver of IRB Application to IRB office for review. 

 

2.IRB reviews, requests clarification (if necessary), and issues approval or denial notice. 

 

3.Students submit Student Class Project Application to instructor, who reviews for waiver 

compatibility and retains for one year. 

 

Group or individual student class projects that do not meet waiver criteria cannot be conducted until 

either the standard IRB Application to Conduct Research with Human Subjects or the 

Screening/Abbreviated IRB Application, as appropriate for the particular study, is submitted and 

approved by the IRB. 


