
The University of Mississippi   
 
 

Wireless Communication Devices  

On April 17, 2006, Governor Haley Barbour approved Senate Bill Number (S.B. No.) 2398. 
This bill had an effective date of July 1, 2006 and contains provisions for use of wireless 
communication devices by state officers and employees.  On July 2, 2007, the Chancellor 
stated that all university-owned wireless devices must be disconnected or transferred to a 
personal account by August 1, 2007.  The following policy is a result of these actions, as 
well as current Internal Revenue Service regulations.   

Summary/Purpose:  
To provide guidelines for all university issued wireless communication devices.   

Policy:  
All university-owned cellular devices (telephones, PDA’s, cellular wireless modems), must 
be disconnected or transferred to a personal account by August 1, 2007.  Requests for an 
exception can be directed to the attention of the Vice Chancellor for Administration and 
Finance.  

Definition:  
Wireless Communication Devices are cellular telephones, cellular wireless modems, standard 
and two-way pagers, personal digital assistant (PDA) devices having wireless communication 
capability including telephone, e-mail, and internet access, or any similar device that 
performs some or all of these functions.  

Eligibility:  
Wireless devices may be purchased only with prior approval from the Vice Chancellor for 
Administration and Finance.  

Procedures:  
To disconnect a university-owned cellular device in accordance with the 
Chancellor’s mandate:  

1 Contact your cellular provider.    
2 Forward a copy of the original Wireless Communication Device Issuance 
Request form, with the return date notated, to Telecommunications.  If the  

Policy Code ADM.TC.200.150. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory Generated on 03/01/2010 at 11:05:01 CST See 
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details.  



 departmental copy of the original form cannot be located, please contact  
Debbie Prestage at dprestag@olemiss.edu or call 5205.  

3.  Deliver a copy of the Wireless Communication Device Issuance Request 
form (including return date), a completed UM Property Disposal Form, and the 
wireless device to Procurement Services.  

To request an exception, the departmental chair/director must submit a written request and 
Wireless Communication Issuance Request form to the Vice Chancellor for Administration 
and Finance.  If approved, the departmental chair/director and employee must then 
determine the most cost effective device and/or service (the lowest cost device and service 
that will carry out its intended use must be selected).  A copy of the approved Issuance 
Request form and signed copy of the Wireless Communication Device Policy must be 
maintained in the employee’s departmental personnel file for audit purposes.   

Purchase of the wireless devices, activation, and monthly service fees are the responsibility 
of the department.  The following process must be followed to purchase a university owned 
wireless device. Only vendors listed by the State of Mississippi Information Technology 
Office can be used. Refer to the Mississippi Wireless Communication Commission for 
procurement rules, guidelines and procedures at 
http://www.wcc.ms.gov/mwcc/wireless.nsf/webpages/purrules_purrulespage 

• A purchase order must be obtained through normal procedures from Procurement 
Services and the number recorded on the Wireless Communication Device Issuance Request 
form.   
• An approved Wireless Communication Device Issuance Request form, including 
purchase order number, must be provided to the cellular vendor to obtain service.    
• The employee must go to the cellular store to receive the wireless device or contact the 
vendor representative and arrange for the device to be delivered to the department.     
• Only the lowest cost cellular telephone, pager, or personal digital assistance device 
which will carry out its intended use may be purchased.  Text messaging is not an allowable 
university expense.  
• Once the wireless device is activated, a property tag must be obtained from 
Procurement Services. The device must have a property number assigned whether it was 
purchased or received at no cost.   
• Detailed billing must be applied to each wireless device account, to provide 
documentation for departmental personnel to verify calls made to and from the device. (All 
billings are considered public records subject to disclosure under the Mississippi Public 
Records Act.)  
• A completed Wireless Communication Device Issuance Request form, including 
purchase order number, must be mailed or faxed (7010) to the Telecommunications Center.   
• Departments must fax (7010) Telecommunications a completed “ Wireless  
Communication Device Issuance Request” indicating date terminated in the  

Policy Code ADM.TC.200.150. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory Generated on 03/01/2010 at 11:05:01 CST See 
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details.  



 “Justify”  section if service is terminated to a wireless device.      

Failure to follow this process will result in a personal expense to the 
employee. 

Wireless communication devices and services provided by the University will have the 
following stipulations:  

• No wireless devices may be purchased with state funds without prior approval from 
the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance.  
• Communication devices shall be used for university business only.  No personal use 
(incoming or outgoing) of any manner or for any reason will be allowed.   
• A state agency shall not reimburse any officer or employee for use of his or her 
personal wireless communication device.  
• Only one wireless device is allowed per employee.   
• Cellular plans are to be selected based on the number of minutes required for the 
employee to conduct university business.  Package minute plans are not to be construed as 
free minutes and are not provided for personal use.   
• Regardless of vendor, the wireless device must be assigned to a university account for 
billing purposes (not a personal account).   
• The vendor will send the monthly service bills to the Telecommunications Center for 
processing and payment. The department will have access to the detailed bill for verification 
purposes.  
• Users must review itemized wireless invoices monthly and indicate the names of 
individuals called and the business purpose of all calls.  
• Use must be tracked, verified, and signed by the employee and the supervisor at each 
billing cycle to indicate accuracy.   
• A copy of the signed bill must be retained in departmental files for audit purposes.  
• The departmental chair/director will be responsible for monitoring the wireless device 
usage and ensuring that all requirements are met.   
• When an employee ceases employment with the University, the wireless device must 
be returned to the University.   
• Departments must maintain a detailed copy of the bill for a minimum of three (3) 
years. The copy must have an explanation for each call on the bill.   

Due to documented safety concerns, the University does not support or condone the use of 
cellular telephones while an employee is driving.  This restriction applies both to 
hand-held and hands-free phones. Also, employees should be aware that cellular  

Policy Code ADM.TC.200.150. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory Generated on 03/01/2010 at 11:05:01 CST See 
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details.  



telephone transmissions are not secure transmissions. Confidential information regarding
official business should be transmitted from a secure environment.   

Non-compliance with this policy will result in disconnection of the 
device and disciplinary action by the University, which could lead to 

termination. 

Policy Code ADM.TC.200.150. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory Generated on 03/01/2010 at 11:05:01 CST See 
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details.  


