
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

 Repair and Maintenance of Labs  
 

Summary/Purpose:  Policy defining charges for repairs and maintenance in teaching and research 

labs.  

 

Research Labs:  
Maintenance, repair and renovation costs will be the responsibility of the department owning the 

research lab. For sponsored research projects requiring special services or facilities, the 

department must resolve cost issues associated with the needed modifications with Facilities 

Management or Facilities Planning Departments before submitting the proposal.  The need for 

such resolution will be signified by checking the box labeled “Facilities Management” on the 

ORSP Transmittal Sheet for Sponsored Projects.  

 

Teaching Labs:  
Funds will be set aside in a special Facilities Management account at the beginning of each fiscal 

year for the maintenance and repair of teaching labs in the amount of $125,000.  Facilities 

Management will do maintenance and repair of fixed teaching facilities up to the above amount 

from these set aside fund.   

 

If the cost of repairs or maintenance exceeds $500 per work order, the cost in excess of that 

amount will be negotiated between the department and/or school, Facilities Management and, 

subject to the availability of funds. 

  

If necessary, the designees for the Vice Chancellor of Administration and Finance and the 

Provost will resolve any outstanding issues related to the cost of the repairs to teaching facilities.  

 

Special Notes:  

The maintenance and repair of specialized equipment (projectors, screens, computers, lab 

equipment, and so on) will be funded by internal funds other than Facilities Management set 

aside funds described above.  

 

Equipment or facilities representing a health or safety hazard to people must be reported 

immediately to Facilities Management.  Funding issues associated with the remediation of these 

problems must not hinder the immediate repair or maintenance.    

 

Equipment on the exterior of buildings will be repaired or replaced by Facilities Management.  

 


