
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Attending Veterinarian and Alternates 
 
Summary/Purpose: Attending Veterinarian’s responsibilities and the procedure during the 
absence of the Attending Veterinarian. 
 
The University of Mississippi Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) has made 
arrangements to have a half-time Attending Veterinarian (AV). All of the Veterinarian’s time is 
devoted to the animal research program. The AV has direct responsibility, as described in the 
paragraph below, for all University-based activities on the University of Mississippi campus and 
its satellites involving the care and use of all vertebrate animals used for research and teaching.  
 
Responsibilities of the Attending Veterinarian 
This position is responsible for providing veterinary guidance and consultation to animal users 
on matters concerning preventive medicine, proper use of anesthetics, and analgesics and 
tranquilizers, perioperative care, euthanasia, diagnostic procedures, and provision of veterinary 
care, emergency care and use of hazards, occupational health, use of animals, and aspects of 
animal husbandry. The AV provides guidance on health procedures and choosing appropriate 
animal models or alternatives to animal models, in addition to providing training to investigators 
and animal technicians on animal welfare laws.  The AV trains personnel on surgical procedures 
and certifies readiness to perform surgery (See Policy 302.009 on Mandatory Training 
Components for Research Animal Surgery). 
 
Procedures in the Absence of the Attending Veterinarian 
There may be times when the Attending Veterinarian is out of town or unavailable. In these 
instances, arrangements have been made with two alternate veterinarians familiar with the 
UM animal care and use program. The Animal Facility Supervisor, IACUC Research 
Compliance Specialist or other designated personnel will contact the appropriate alternate 
veterinarian. 
 
1. Contact the local veterinarian, who has a contractual agreement to be on call for 

consultation and emergency care, if the AV is out of town or unavailable and there is an 
emergency (accident, natural disaster, fire) or a PI requests/needs consultation. 

 
2. Contact the UMMC veterinarian, who has agreed to assist with the review of protocols 

and significant change amendments via e-mail/fax, if the AV is out of town or 
unavailable and protocols and/or significant change amendments need to be reviewed 
and approved. 

 
Additional information is posted in animal facilities. 
 
References:  
(AWAR §2.33a1; §2.33b1; §2.33b5) 
(PHS Policy IV.C.1.e; IV.A.3.b.1; Guide, p. 14) 
(The IACUC Handbook, 2nd ed., Silverman et al., p. 493) 
 


