
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 5 

Housing Agreement 
 

Summary/Purpose: This policy explains in full the student’s contractual obligations to the 

University by living in on-campus housing.                                         

 

This contract is an agreement between the university and the individual student. It is for the 

period of contract as specified in paragraph one of Terms and Conditions – University Housing 

Policies, and entitles the student to use the accommodations only in such a manner as set for the 

herein as in the Residence Life Handbook. This contract may be terminated only under the 

conditions specified herein.  

 

Students and their parents or guardians are urged to read carefully the terms and conditions of 

this agreement. If a student is under 19, a parent or guardian must sign this contract along with 

the student. The university agrees to provide accommodations under the conditions of this 

agreement and as described in the Residence Life Handbook. (The booklet is available to all 

residence hall students.)  

      

  

The contract students sign is a legally binding contract for the fall and spring semesters. 

 

Terms and Conditions – University Housing Policies 

  

1. Period of Contract Academic year – fall and spring  

2. University Housing Policy This signed contract becomes a legally binding document between 

the university and the signee for both the fall and spring semesters or balance remaining at the 

time of assignment. The residence hall application and contract are for accommodations in a 

residence hall and do not guarantee specific hall or roommate preferences. Residents must be 

enrolled to live on campus and are responsible for knowing and abiding by the rules and 

regulations contained in this contract, the University Policy Website, and the Residence Life 

Handbook. 

3. Housing Reservations  

(a) Reservations for new students Advance housing reservations for the academic year are 

made once an applicant has been admitted to the university, completed a residence hall 

application, submitted a $75 non-refundable application fee, and signed a housing contract. (b) 

Reservations for continuing students Currently enrolled students seeking advance housing 

reservations for the upcoming academic year are required to sign a contract and remit a $75 

application fee.  4. Occupancy This contract is personal and may not be assigned or transferred 

to another person. The space may not be sublet. The resident agrees not to allow any persons 

other than the assigned roommate(s) to live in the residence hall room, suite or apartment. 

Violation of this restriction is considered serious and may result in fines, eviction from the 

residence halls, or expulsion from the university. The period of occupancy begins upon receipt of 

a room key by the resident and will terminate within 24 hours after his/her last class or 

examination. 

5. Housing Fee The contract binds a student to pay housing rental fees according to the 

university payment schedule for one academic year as indicated in paragraph one. The rental fee 

is billed per semester and is subject to final approval by the Board of Trustees. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 5 

 6. Assignment Priority:  Room assignments are based upon the date the housing application, 

$75 prepayment and Housing Contract are received in the Student Housing office.  No specific 

room assignment based solely upon a resident’s request is guaranteed or implied.  Submitting the 

Housing Contract does not guarantee housing if all spaces are filled in the residence halls prior to 

the time a student’s application is completed. If housing demand exceeds room-assignment 

capacity the University reserves the right to use designated temporary room assignments pending 

assignment/relocation to a permanent living space.   

7.  Commuter Policy:  Students with 30 or less hours who wish to commute from home and 

living a 60 mile radius of Oxford, MS must complete and submit a Commuter Form prior by July 

1 to be released from the Housing Contract.  Single freshmen (except commuters living with 

parents or guardians) who enroll and are found to be living of campus without an authorized 

exemption will be billed the cost of housing.  Commuter forms are only available prior to the fall 

semester for the academic year.  Petition to commute for the spring semester will not be 

considered unless the student is a new incoming student for the spring semester.   

8. Assignments The University encourages diversity and does not make housing assignments on 

a segregated basis with regard to race, religion, color, national origin, or disability. Assignments 

will be held through Hall Opening, but accommodations will not be guaranteed for those arriving 

late or failing to show without making arrangements with the Student Housing office prior to 

Hall Opening day.  

9. Cancellation Prior to the Start of a Semester Cancellations must be made in writing and 

postmarked by the cancellation deadline. The academic year housing contract becomes binding 

after the cancellation period has passed.  Persons enrolled at the university will be held to the 

terms of the contract if written cancellation is not received prior to July 1 and will be financially 

responsible for both fall and spring semester rent. New students who have applied for the spring 

semester must submit written cancellation before December 1 in order to be released from the 

contract. New students canceling after December 1 will be held to the terms of the contract if 

enrolled.  

10. Cancellation After the Start of the Semester The contract may be terminated after the start 

of a semester without forfeiture of spring semester charges only for the following reasons: 

withdrawal, marriage, fulfillment of academic programs requiring a student to move out of the 

area (e.g., student teaching), or circumstances that are determined by the university to be beyond 

the student’s control. Notification must be submitted in writing to the Student Housing office 

prior to the cancellation deadline, and documentary evidence will be required to show cause for 

cancellation. Student Housing does not release students who have decreased their class load from 

full- to part-time status, or for failure to have read this contract completely, or for pre-existing 

medical conditions. 

11. Withdrawal from the University Official withdrawal from the university is when the 

student has registered and paid fees but decides to cancel registration and formally withdraw. 

The refund of the room rent is prorated based upon the University refund schedule.  If a student 

re-enrolls in the university during the period covered by the original housing contract, the student 

will be bound to the remainder of the contract.  Students must complete a withdrawal form in the 

Office of Student Housing and properly check out of the room.    

12. Denied Admission, Suspension, or Dismissal If a student is not permitted to register at the 

university for an upcoming semester, the student must cancel in writing with the Department of 

Student Housing and Residence Life prior to Hall Opening. The written cancellation must 

identify the student’s denied admission status.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 5 

13. Contract Appeals The Department of Student Housing and Residence Life offers an appeal 

process by which a resident may request to be released from the academic year housing contract. 

The appeals application form and documentation must be completed and returned to the Student 

Housing office by the fifteenth consecutive day of the semester for which the release is 

requested. A mandatory meeting will be scheduled.  Submitting an appeal does not guarantee 

release from the contract.    

14. Right of the University to Cancel The university reserves the right to refuse admission or 

readmission to university housing or to cancel the contract during the academic year for the 

student’s failure to meet university requirements, policies, or regulations, or in the event of 

felony conviction by civil authorities, or for posing a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of 

the signee or others in the university community. Cancellation of the contract for the above 

reasons may result in the eviction of the resident within one to three days’ notice, except where 

the university determines that the continued residency of the student would pose a danger to the 

health or welfare of the residential community, in which case the student may be evicted 

immediately. In such cases there will be no refund of prepaid rent. In the event accommodations 

assigned to the student are destroyed or otherwise made unavailable and the university does not 

furnish other accommodations, the contract shall terminate; all rights and liabilities of the parties 

hereto shall cease; and rental payments previously made shall be refunded on a prorated basis as 

of the date accommodations become unavailable. 

15. Consolidation All university housing rooms are to be occupied by two students, with the 

exception of the approved single or triple occupancy assignments. In the case where one of the 

occupants moves from the assigned space, the student who remains agrees to move to another 

room or to accept another roommate.  The residence hall staff will assist the resident with 

consolidation, but it is the resident’s responsibility to find a person with whom to share a room 

and to consolidate by the designated deadline. Where there is no other student with whom to 

consolidate, the student agrees that the area must be maintained in a manner by the occupant that 

will allow another student to move in immediately. Students refusing to consolidate will be 

automatically assessed a private room fee.  The university reserves the right to reassign residents 

during the semester in order to consolidate vacant spaces and to increase occupancy. All 

increases in occupancy will conform with prevailing occupancy and health standards.  

16. Right of University to Relocate Residents The university reserves the right to relocate 

residents from one space to another when it is determined, in its sole and absolute discretion, that 

the move is in the resident’s best interest, or those of his/her fellow students. Also, when it is 

determined that a resident is not residing in an assigned space, the university reserves the right to 

require the student to return the key and relocate to the assigned space. The resident will be 

notified in writing of his/her obligation to the housing contract and will be advised that a space 

will be reserved should the resident decide to return to campus housing. 

17. Housing Changes The resident agrees to abide by all regulations with regard to changing 

assignments. Approved room/hall changes occur during designated periods during each semester. 

A $25/day charge may be levied against students moving out of, into, or within university 

housing without having authorization from an Area Coordinator, Associate Director, Residence 

Hall Director/Resident Director or other non-student official from the Department of Student 

Housing.  Once a housing change has been approved, the student must move within 48 hours, or 

he/she will be charged $25 per day until he/she properly checks out of the space.    

18. Responsibility for Personal Property The resident assumes all responsibility for personal 

property. The university does not assume any legal obligation for any resident’s personal 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 5 

property that may be lost or damaged in its buildings or on its grounds. Students are 

encouraged to provide their own health and personal property loss/renters insurance.  

19. Responsibility for Room The resident is responsible for the condition of the assigned space 

and shall reimburse the university for all damage to the space, whether the damage was a result 

of committing an act or failure to do an act to prevent the damage. The resident is also 

responsible for loss of fixtures, furnishings, or properties furnished under the contract. No 

alterations are to be made to the furniture provided by the university. Every piece of furniture in 

the assigned room at the time the resident moves in must stay in the room for the duration of 

residency. The resident may not move, trade, or store furnishings from the space. There is an 

automatic $50 charge for violating this policy. Additional furniture brought into the room must 

be freestanding and clear of all existing furniture, fixtures, or walls contained in the room. 

Students will be required to complete a Room Condition Report within 24 hours of occupancy 

and return it to the resident assistant. When occupancy is terminated, students must obtain 

housing clearance. This will be done by a Department of Student Housing and Residence Life 

staff member who will inspect the area and assess for damages and missing property. Those 

vacating housing without following this procedure, unless following express checkout 

procedures, will be charged $25 plus the cost of repairs of replacement resulting from damages 

or missing items. If necessary, cleaning charges may be assessed.  

20. Responsibility for Communal Property (Including, but not limited to hallways, baths, 

stairwells, elevators, lounges, studies, utility rooms and kitchens.) Residents are expected to take 

every precaution to assure that communal property is not abused. In halls or sections where the 

university has determined that there is undue abuse of university property and the 

responsible individual(s) cannot be identified, all residents will be held responsible for 

paying a prorated share of the cost of repairing such damages. Where organizations have 

exclusive use of an area, those organizations are responsible for reimbursing the university for 

cost of repairs from damage to communal property if the responsible individual(s) cannot be 

identified. Where it is determined that organizations are not in support of housing regulations, 

they will lose use of the area. The university reserves the right to determine the use of all lounges 

and common and public areas in the residence halls. 

 21. Firearms, Explosives, Fireworks, Flammables The possession or use of firearms, 

ammunition, explosives, fireworks, candles, halogen lamps, and other items detailed in the 

Residence Life Handbook is prohibited and can result in automatic eviction from university 

housing and/or suspension from the university.  

22. Fire Safety Evacuation of university buildings is mandatory when a fire alarm sounds. The 

sounding of false alarms and tampering with fire fighting or safety equipment to include 

extinguishers, hoses, smoke detectors, EXIT signs, or pull boxes are prohibited. Those suspected 

of such offenses are subject to criminal prosecution, eviction from university housing, and/or 

suspension from the university.  

23. Guests and Visitation Residents are responsible for the conduct of their guests and must be 

present for the duration of the visit. The resident agrees to abide by the visitation policy detailed 

in the Residence Life Handbook. The maximum visitation of guests extends from 9:00 a.m. to 

midnight Sunday through Thursday and 9:00 a.m. to 2 a.m. Friday and Saturday. Visitation 

privileges do not extend to bathroom facilities on residential floors. All persons will be 

responsible for complying with visitation regulations applicable to the visited area. The 

administration reserves the right to alter or terminate the visitation program if the program is 

determined not to be in the best interest of the university.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 5 

24. Inspections The University reserves the right to enter residence hall rooms for inspection of 

facilities; for health, safety, and maintenance; for damage to space or equipment; and to uphold 

university policy.  

25. Keys and Access Cards The resident agrees not to loan/duplicate keys and/or access cards. 

All lost/stolen keys or access cards must be reported immediately. Keys and access cards must be 

returned when occupancy is terminated. If a key/access card is not returned, a fee will be 

assessed to the resident.  

26. Quiet Hours Courtesy hours are in effect 24 hours a day. Strict quiet hours are in effect from 

9 p.m. until 8 a.m. each day. Strict quiet hours shall be in effect in all halls 24 hours a day for a 

minimum of seven days before final examinations and continue throughout the exam period.  

27. Mail/E-mail All students residing in university housing are encouraged to rent a post office 

box.  It is the responsibility of the student to get his/her post office box number, keys, and e-mail 

address from the respective areas. All information sent to students via mail and/or e-mail is the 

responsibility of the student to secure.  

28. Incident Reports An incident report constitutes administrative written notice concerning an 

infraction of university housing policy. These reports are issued by the resident assistants or 

others designated by the Office of Student Life. Infractions of university housing policies may be 

dealt with administratively or through the judicial system.  

29. Smoking All residence halls are smoke free. Smoking is prohibited in university residence 

halls.  

30. Alcohol and Controlled Substances Residents agree to avoid and refrain from the use, 

possession, or sale of any and all illegal narcotics or other controlled substances. Residents must 

abide by the university and Student Housing policy regarding alcoholic beverages. Violations of 

Mississippi law and university policy are considered serious and may result in fines, eviction 

from housing, and expulsion from the university.  

31. Responsibilities of the University The University agrees to exercise reasonable caution to 

safeguard the health, safety, and property of each resident, and will make a good faith effort to 

repair properly reported defects in the residence halls. The university shall not be liable for 

failure of water supply, electrical current, or heating/cooling systems; presence of insects or 

vermin; and the loss, damage, or injury to a resident or his/her guest, or the property of any of 

them.  

32. Security Visitors must enter and exit only by main entrance to hall. Residents who leave 

through locked security doors are responsible for leaving the doors in locked position. 

Disciplinary action and/or fines levied toward will be taken against students who prop doors 

open or exit alarmed doors. For personal safety, ground floor accessible windows must be kept 

locked. 

 

 

 


