
 The University of Mississippi 

 

HOUSING CONTRACT APPEALS 

 

Purpose/Summary: This policy explains the appeal process students must use when wishing to 

be released from the contractual obligations of their housing contracts. 

All residents have signed housing contracts that legally bind them to on-campus housing, either 

in the residence halls, residential colleges, or Northgate apartments for a full academic year (fall 

and spring semesters) or Campus Walk for a full calendar year (12-month lease). 

Under a limited number of circumstances, residents may be released from this obligation on a 

prorated basis, if notification is received in writing prior to the publicized deadline. The 

following reasons are accepted without penalty: 

• Graduation 

• Withdrawal from the university 

• Marriage (proof required) 

• Transfer to another university (proof required) 

• Participation in an approved exchange program 

• Student teaching outside of commuting distance 

• Pharmacy externships or similar approved programs 

• Military personnel given permanent change of station (PCS) or temporary duty (TDY) 

orders (proof required) 

Residents who wish to be released from their housing contracts for reasons other than those 

listed may submit a Housing Appeals form online, which will be reviewed by their Assistant 

Director for Residential Learning, and forwarded to the Student Housing Appeals Committee. 

Releases are uncommon and are only granted by the Student Housing Appeals Committee under 

extraordinary circumstances. The Student Housing Appeals Committee is made up of staff 

members from various university departments. This group conducts two appeal periods for each 

semester (fall/spring). 

Appeals must be submitted to student housing by the published deadline for each appeal period 

(pre-Fall, Fall, pre-Spring, Spring). Each student wishing to appeal will be contacted by student 

housing to schedule a personal interview time with the Student Housing Appeals Committee. 

Decisions will be made in absentia should a student fail to show up to the scheduled meeting. 

All decisions made by the committee are final, and there is no further avenue of appeal. Please 

note that a request for release from the housing contract will not automatically be granted. 

Granted appeals are unique exceptions with circumstances warranting special consideration. It is 

in the resident’s best interest not to ignore or avoid payments to the Office of the Bursar, and not 

to make alternative living arrangements prior to receiving an official decision from the Student 

Housing Appeals Committee. 


