
The University of Mississippi 

 

ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND LOSS OF PRIVILEGES 

 

Purpose/Summary: This policy defines the process through which students may be 

removed from Student Housing for serious policy infractions.  

 

The Department of Student Housing is committed to providing a safe environment that promotes 

the academic success and development of all on-campus students. Incidents in which the acts of 

a person or a group infringe upon the rights of others in the community are taken very seriously. 

Students found to be fighting, threatening/ harassing and/or bullying, tampering with fire or life 

safety equipment, stealing, damaging hall property, using or possessing drugs or alcohol, using 

or possessing weapons, endangering the safety of others, or found to be not enrolled may be 

removed immediately from the residence halls and may lose all visitation privileges. This 

includes the ability to be in or around all Residential facilities. Additionally, if removed from the 

residence halls, students will be responsible for the entire rental cost of their housing agreement 

period, both for fall and spring semesters. In the event that a student is involved in a serious 

policy violation as previously stated, or a culmination of policy violations that affect fellow 

residents, the department will begin the administrative review process. The administrative review 

process is separate from and in addition to any student conduct proceedings. Within the 

administrative review process, a staff member will meet with the student(s) to determine if they 

will:  

 

1) Be allowed to continue living in their current hall,  
2) Be moved to another residence hall, or  
3) Be removed from the residence halls completely.  

 

A move or a removal will result in the student(s) not being able to visit the residence hall(s) at 

any time. Removal from the halls does not release students from the financial obligations 

outlined in their Student Housing Agreement. Administrative review decisions can be appealed 

to the director of Student Housing, or designee whose decision is final. 


