
The University of Mississippi 

 

DRUGS 

 

Purpose/Summary: Use and possession of drugs and drug paraphernalia.  

 

Drug use, including the misuse of prescription drugs, unfortunately is a prevalent problem at 

college and university campuses, and The University of Mississippi has not been spared. The 

University unequivocally prohibits the use and possession of drugs on its campus. The specifics 

of the drug policy are outlined below.  

 

1. Possession, Use, and Sale of Drugs and Drug Paraphernalia a. The University of 
Mississippi prohibits the use, possession, distribution, sale, manufacture, and delivery of 

illicit drugs including the misuse of prescription medications, by members of its 

community. Illegal drugs, including prescription drugs for which the person does not 

have a valid prescription, are subject to confiscation.  

2. The University of Mississippi also prohibits the possession, sale, and distribution of drug 
paraphernalia (including, but not limited to, pipes, bongs, roach clips, rolling papers, 

etc.). These items are strictly prohibited and are subject to confiscation.  

 

Violation of this policy will result in disciplinary action and students may also be subject to 

criminal prosecution and/or civil liability. The University of Mississippi also prohibits behavior 

that is a direct result of drug consumption, use, or abuse. Any student found to be visibly 

overcome by the use of drugs will be found in violation of University policy. Information 

regarding a student’s violation of the University’s drug policy may be released to that student’s 

parents, if the student is under 21 years of age.  

 

Should any drugs and/or drug paraphernalia be found in a room, the student and the roommate 

will be found equally responsible for the drugs and/or drug paraphernalia. The roommate or 

another person present at the time of the incident may claim responsibility for the drugs and/or 

drug paraphernalia. If responsibility is not taken by a person or persons involved; the residents of 

the room in which the drugs and/or drug paraphernalia is found will take full responsibility 

through the student conduct process. If the incident involved only one roommate; only the 

roommate involved will be responsible for the Drugs and/or Drug Paraphernalia.  

 

In addition, students found to be in violation of this policy are subject to immediate removal 

from on-campus housing. Students removed from on-campus housing due to disciplinary action 

will be held responsible for the full cost of their housing agreement. 


