
The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 7  

Full Board Review Criteria for IRB Applications  
  

Summary/Purpose:  Criteria and decision-making processes to determine whether IRB applications 

need Full Board review.  
  

Introduction: Regulatory criteria for assigning ‘exempt’ level review are fairly precise.  However, in 

many cases, decisions to assign expedited versus full board review require judgments of risk and 

interpretation of regulations.  This policy is designed to minimize judgment and interpretation and to 

distribute review level decision-making to a designated sub-group of IRB members under certain 

conditions.  
  

The regulations allow expedited review when the following two conditions are met: 1) the research 

involves Minimal Risk and 2) the research is listed as one of the “Categories of Research That May 

Be Reviewed by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) through an Expedited Review Procedure” (63 

FR 60364-60367, November 9, 1998).  
  

Minimal Risk means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research 

are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the 

performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests 45 CFR 46.102(i).  
  

Determinations of ‘minimal risk’ and ‘minor increase over minimal risk’ (for 46.406 research) for children 

will be based on the attached list [Attachment A] of considerations, criteria, and exemplars that have 

been conditionally approved by the Department Of Health And Human Services Secretary's Advisory 

Committee On Human Research Protections (SACHRP).  
  

1.  Examples of Studies that May Receive Expedited Review   
  

• Deception studies using a ‘confederate’  

• Deception studies using misleading or deceptive:  

1. study descriptions  

2. procedure explanations   

3. survey instructions / rationales  

• Subjects are children and research falls under 46.404 “Research not involving greater than 

minimal risk”  

• Subjects are cognitively impaired and research is approved by an external committee of experts 

on the population (e.g., North Mississippi Regional Center)  
  

2.  Examples of Studies that Likely Require Full Board Review   
  

• Deception studies that give subjects deceptive feedback, whether positive or negative  

[e.g., based on IQ or personality tests or interviews]  

• Psychotherapy treatment studies with adults  

• Studies involving a waiver of parental consent (permission)   

• Subjects are in a subservient power relationship to investigators or to parties with an interest in 

the research, such as employees of the investigator.  
  
  
  
  

http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/63fr60364.html
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/63fr60364.html
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/63fr60364.html


The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 7  

3.   Examples of Elements that Require Full Board Review   
  

• Administration of alcohol  

• Administration of non-drug dietary supplements  

• Use of X-rays   

• Classified research  

• Administration of FDA approved drugs and use of devices presenting more than minimal risk   

• Administration of  non-FDA approved drugs and devices that come under FDA regulations  

• Activity exceeding moderate exercise  [See Attachment B for Determination of Intensity of 

Exercise]  

• Surreptitious videotaping in non-public settings  

• Surreptitious monitoring of electronic communications   

• Subjects are prisoners  

• Subjects are pregnant  

• Subjects are children and research poses greater than Minimal Risk.  Below are the relevant 

categories. o 45 CFR 46.405 “Research involving greater than minimal risk but presenting the 

prospect of direct benefit to the individual subjects” OR  

o 45 CFR 46.406 “Research involving greater than minimal risk and no prospect of direct 

benefit to individual subjects, but likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the 

subject's disorder or condition” OR  

o 45 CFR 46.407 “Research not otherwise approvable which presents an opportunity to 

understand, prevent, or alleviate a serious problem affecting the health or welfare of 

children”  
  

  

 
  

Expedited or Full Board Review Determination Procedure  

• A subcommittee consisting of at least these three IRB members: the IRB Chair, the  

Director of Research Integrity and Compliance, and the Research Compliance  

Specialist, will determine which protocols in categories 1 & 2 above may be reviewed as 

expedited.  Additional Board members will substitute when there is a conflict of interest.  
  

• Vulnerable population studies will be reviewed by an expert consultant(s) if there is no expertise 

with the population among the subcommittee members.  The consultant’s review will be 

considered in the subcommittee’s decision-making.   
  

• A majority of the subcommittee reviewers must agree that expedited review is appropriate; 

otherwise, the protocol will be reviewed by the Full Board.  
  
  
  
    

  

 
  

ATTACHMENT A  
  

DETERMINATION OF MINIMAL RISK FOR CHILD RESEARCH  

  



The University of Mississippi  

Page 3 of 7  

  

Derived from a presentation by: Celia B. Fisher, Ph.D., and Susan Z. Kornetsky, M.P.H. 5th Report for SACHRP 
Consideration Clarifying 45 CFR 46 Subpart D Definitions - January 31, 2005  
  

  

Reference Point for Uniform Definition  

• The definition of “minimal risk” at 45 CFR 46.102(i) when applied to Subpart D should be interpreted  as those 

risks encountered by normal, average, healthy children living in safe environments in daily life or during the 

performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.  

  

Minimal Risk Should be Age indexed  

• Evaluation of minimal risk under Subpart D should be indexed to the risks in daily life and routine medical and 

psychological examinations experienced by children the same age as the subject population.  

  

Upper Limits of Risk & Harm  

• The uniform, age-indexed definition of minimal risk should represent the upper not lower limits of risk to which 

children can be exposed under §46.404.  

Rationale: Research procedures should not fall under §46.404 for children who because of health or other reasons 

would be at greater risk of harm from procedures which are minimal risk for normal, average, healthy children living 

in safe environments.  

  

  

Equivalent Procedures  

• Procedures that are equivalent in probability and magnitude of harm to risks of daily life or routine physical or 

psychological examinations or tests experienced by average, healthy, normal children living in safe environments 

should be considered as consistent with the definition of “minimal risk.”  

  

Equivalence Criteria  

• Is the probability and magnitude of harm equivalent in:  

  duration  

  cumulative characteristics   reversibility of 

harm  

  to risks of daily life or routine examinations  

  

Examples of Well-Child Procedures [From April, 2005 SACHRP presentation; IOM, 2004; 4.9-4.10]  

• Physical examinations  

• Measurement of height, weight, head circumference  

• Assessment of obesity with skin-fold calipers  

• Collection of blood or voided urine  

• Measurement of heart rate and blood pressure  

• Hearing and vision tests  

• Modest changes in diet or schedule  

• Testing of fine and gross motor development  

• Non-invasive physiological monitoring  

• Medical and social history  

• Psychological examinations or tests  

• Guidance and education (for the child, the parents, or both)  

  

Routine Psychological Tests Indexed to Standardized Screening or Assessment Measures   

• Child and adolescent intelligence tests  

• Infant mental and motor scales  

• Educational tests / Reading and math ability tests  

• Neurological or motor disorders  

• Social development  

http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm


The University of Mississippi  

Page 4 of 7  

• Family and peer relationships  

• Emotional regulation  

• Feelings of  sadness or hopelessness  

  

  

DETERMINATION OF MINOR INCREASE OVER MINIMAL RISK FOR CHILD RESEARCH  

  

  

Derived from a presentation by: Celia B. Fisher, Ph.D., and Susan Z. Kornetsky, M.P.H. 5th Report for SACHRP 
Consideration Clarifying 45 CFR 46 Subpart D Definitions - January 31, 2005  
  

Determining Minor Increase Over Minimal Risk  

• Applying a uniform procedure for assessing whether a research presents a minor increase over minimal 

risk requires evaluating the risk along 10 different criteria.  

• Rationale. Methods, compounds, instruments and other research procedures are so variable that a single 

quantitative unit of increase cannot be uniformly applied. However, there is a uniform process of evaluation that can 

be applied.  

  

List of Uniform Criteria for Determining a Minor Increase Over Minimal Risk  

1. Minimal Risk Comparison  

2. Scientific Evidence of Risk  

3. Certainty of Evidence  

4. Documented Harms  

5. Equivalence of Procedures  

6. Participant Perspectives  

7. Mitigating Factors  

8. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  

9. Monitoring  

10. Safety & Competence  

  

1.  Minimal Risk Comparison  

• The procedure does not meet minimal risk criteria  

• The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research is greater than those  

ordinarily encountered by normal, average, healthy children living in safe environments in their daily 

activities or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.  

  

2.  Scientific Evidence of Risk  

• There is peer reviewed scientific evidence of the range of risks associated with the procedure for 

the subject population, OR  

• The procedure is sufficiently similar to other interventions with well characterized risks that prudent, 

informed judgments about risks can be made.  

  

3. Certainty of Evidence  

• The extent and quality of the evidence is such that there is little uncertainty about the range of risks 

involved.  

• Lack of sufficient data for a risk profile would create a higher level of uncertainty supporting a more 

conservative approach to judgments that a procedure is only a minor increment over minimal risk  

  

4. Documented Harms  

• The documented harms are not serious for the subject population  

• The data indicates no or an extremely small probability of risk of major complications.  

• Harms associated with the procedure do not require in-patient monitoring or follow-up evaluation (for the 

procedure itself)  

• The harms if they occur are transient and reversible  

http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/archive/sachrp/mtgings/mtg01-05/present/fisher_files/frame.htm


The University of Mississippi  

Page 5 of 7  

  

5. Transient & Reversible  

• Transient:  Restricted to time of procedure or short post-experimental period  

• Reversible: Procedure to reverse the effect requires no more than a short-term simple clinical intervention  

  

5. Equivalence of Procedures  

• The procedures are equivalent in risk to documented risk profiles in terms of  

a. Duration of harm or discomfort and  

b. Cumulative effect of procedures on the probability and magnitude of harm.  

  

6. Participant Perspectives  

• Whenever possible the data includes information about the subject population’s experience of the 

procedures (e.g., painful, anxiety producing).  

  

7. Mitigating Factors  

• The procedure reflects consideration of documented mitigating factors known to minimize or exacerbate 

the risk.  

  

8. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  

• Subject inclusion and exclusion criteria reflect consideration of documented subject characteristics that 

may moderate the probability and magnitude of harm of the procedure.  

  

9. Monitoring  

• There is an adequate monitoring procedure.  

  

10. Safety & Competence  

• The procedure will be performed in a safe environment by qualified personnel with experience conducting 

the procedure with the subject population.  



The University of Mississippi  

Page 6 of 7  

ATTACHMENT B 
  

DETERMINATION OF INTENSITY OF EXERCISE Background  

  

OHRP’s “Categories of Research That May Be Reviewed by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) through an 

Expedited Procedure” lists under (4)(e) “moderate exercise, muscular strength testing, body composition testing, 

and flexibility testing where appropriate given the age, weight, and health of the individual.”  There is no further 

detail on how to determine what constitutes moderate exercise (versus vigorous exercise).  This guidance aims to 

meet that need.  

  

Procedure  

The “Expedited or Full Board Review Determination Procedure” described above in this policy will be used to decide 

whether procedures involving exercise meet the definition above.  However, for protocols falling into ‘gray areas,’ 

three sources of information will be used at the discretion of the subcommittee:   

  

1. IRB members or others with expertise in medicine and/or exercise science will be consulted.  

2. Subcommittee members will have investigators run them through exercise procedures.  

3.  Subcommittee members will consult the guideline below from the Centers for Disease Control and     

Prevention and the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM).  

4.  The ACSM table** (p.7) will be considered definitive, if specified parameters are measured in a study of 

apparently healthy adults, as determined by, for example, the PAR-Q or PAR-

Q+   

  

ACSM/CDC Guidelines:  

• Moderate exercise consists of activities that result in a noticeable increase in breathing and heart rate, but 

can be comfortably sustained for ~45 minutes. The activities are commonly described as “very light” to 

“light” to “somewhat hard” when the level of perceived exertion is rated.  During moderate intensity 

exercise, participants should be able to easily carry on a conversation.  

Examples of common moderate intensity activities include:  

o Walking at a moderate or brisk pace on a level surface o Hiking o Water 

aerobics o Yoga  

o Doubles tennis o Raking the lawn o Moderate household cleaning (e.g. 

vacuuming, washing windows, sweeping).  

   

• More than moderate exercise (vigorous) results in substantial increases in breathing and heart rate. The 

activities are commonly described as “hard” to “very hard” when the level of perceived exertion is rated. 

Carrying on a conversation is difficult during/while performing vigorous intensity exercise. Examples of 

common more than moderate intensity activities include:  

o Jogging or running o  Step aerobics o  Circuit weight training  

o Most competitive sports (basketball, soccer, football, etc.) o Singles tennis 

o Heavy yard work (e.g. digging ditches, swinging an ax, pushing a mower).  

  

• Note: Moderate intensity activities may, in fact, be more than moderate if the participants are sedentary, not 

physically fit, elderly, and/or have a known cardiac, pulmonary, or metabolic disease.  

  

Reference:  

ACSM's Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription (2010). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins.  
 

The IRB thanks Dr. Paul Loprinzi for his efforts in compiling this guidance. (Dr. Loprinzi is an Associate Professor of Health, Exercise Science 

and Recreation Management, and Director of the Exercise & Memory Laboratory in the School of Applied Sciences.) 



The University of Mississippi  

Page 7 of 7  

 


