
Blast Email 

 

Summary/Purpose: This policy establishes a process for the authorization, approval, and 

distribution of mass/blast e-mails to off-campus constituencies. The purpose is to coordinate 

the transmission of e-mails to prevent over communication, i.e. spamming of alumni, 

donors, and friends of the University. A second purpose is to ensure a centralized, clean 

database of e-mail addresses. 

 

 A request to send a blast e-mail to an external audience (alumni, donors, friends, etc.) 

 using the alumni database must come from a dean or vice chancellor (or the dean’s or 

 vice chancellor’s designee), an alumni officer or a development officer. In the case of 

 alumni and development officers, the request should have approval of the supervisor. 

  

 All requests for blast e-mails to external constituencies will be handled by the office 

 of the Chief Communications Officer, University Communications. 

 

 In assembling the list for blast messages, Alumni will exclude individuals coded Do 

 Not Solicit or Do Not E-mail in the BSR Advance database. 

 

 The UM Foundation, University Communications, Athletics Assoc., Alumni Assoc. and 

 University Development are responsible for sending their own blast e-mails. 

 Requests from areas other than those stated above should be submitted through the 

 Alumni online report site. Requesting entity must provide desired date of send, 

 approximate number of recipients, purpose of send, and final/approved message 

 content. 

 

 Design needs should be directed to University Communications (x2114) or 

 requestor may select from templates created by University Communications. 

 

 All blast transmissions first will be tested before being sent to the database. The test 

 e-mail to the requesting entity must be confirmed before the message is sent. 

 Any e-mail regarding university athletics programs or individual athletes 

 must be approved by the Athletics Department. 

 

 To prevent “rogue” databases, all e-mail addresses will be maintained by Alumni 

 Records on behalf of departments or other campus agencies. Any incorrect e-mail 

 addresses or bounceback messages should be reported to Alumni Records. 

 

 All blast e-mails will include an opt-out provision. 


