
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 3 

Use of the UM Holding Protocol  
 

Summary/Purpose: Provides a mechanism for holding research animals not assigned to current UM 
protocols.  
 
BACKGROUND  
Protocols must meet all federal regulations. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
(IACUC) has the responsibility to ensure that all animal use activity meets federal law, Public Health 
Service policy, and accreditation standards. All animals maintained by The University of Mississippi 
(UM) must be covered by an active, IACUC-approved protocol. This policy addresses holding 
animals on a global animal holding protocol.  
 
RESPONSIBILITIES  

Researcher – The Principal Investigator (PI) should work with the IACUC to ensure that 
protocols are active and current for any anticipated or ongoing animal use.  
 
IACUC – The IACUC provides a mechanism for rapid transfer of animals in cases where 
necessary to protect the wellbeing and welfare, or prevent the waste of the animals.  
 
Attending Veterinarian or designee – the AV maintains an active Holding Protocol to 
receive animals that would otherwise be euthanized for lack of an existing active protocol.  
 

POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
 

1. Use of the Holding Protocol (HP) is intended to be temporary. Situations which may result in 
the use of this protocol might include:  

 
a. Animals ordered without an approved protocol (noncompliance situation).  
 
b. Animals originating from inactive (or terminated) protocols.  
 
c. Animals on a protocol under investigation for potential issues of noncompliance where 

the welfare or wellbeing of the animals is in question.  
 
d. New investigators without an IACUC-approved protocol having animals that may 

require immediate housing at UM.  
 
e. Investigators that are leaving UM and do not have approval for transfer to the new 

institution.  
 

2. Animal Care staff should consult with the original PI before transferring animals on a holding 
protocol to another PI.  

 
3. Request forms to place animals on the HP will be completed by the PI, the IACUC Chair, or 

the Attending Veterinarian (AV). PIs will submit the form to the AV, the IACUC chair, or 
the IACUC Executive Committee, any of whom can authorize the transfer of animals from an 
active protocol to the holding protocol. All actions will be reported to the IACUC at the next 
regularly scheduled meeting.  

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 3 

4. Fees: Per diems for animals will be charged to the investigator (or department) while animals 
are on the HP. No animal related costs may be charged to federal funding sources until the 
PI’s protocol is approved by the IACUC.  

 
5. Management of Animals on the HP:  
 

a. No experimental procedures are allowed on animals maintained on the HP. Any use of 
animals on the HP constitutes serious regulatory noncompliance.  

 
b. Breeding may be performed to maintain viability of specific lines occurring under this 

protocol. Expansion colony breeding is not authorized.  
 
c. Proper feeding, sanitation and environmental enrichment will continue. Husbandry 

duties may be performed by the Animal Care staff, the PI or previously approved 
personnel depending on the circumstances.  

 
d. No tissues may be utilized from animals euthanized without specific IACUC approval.  
 
e. Animals may not be euthanized for research purposes.  
 
f. No additional animals may be ordered in anticipation of IACUC approval of a study.  
 

6. Animal Care staff must be notified of all significant pre-existing conditions prior to transfer of 
animals onto the holding protocol. Examples include but are not limited to:  

 
a. Existing surgical implants.  
 
b. Zoonotic disease or other hazard.  
 
c. Special dietary needs.  
 
d. Past surgical history.  
 
e. Viral vectors.  
 
f. Poor fecundity.  
 

If any of these situations exist for animals on the holding protocol, Animal Care staff may 
place a per diem surcharge with the Vice Chancellor’s approval.  
 

7. In the case of an expired protocol, the animals may remain on the HP for no more than one 
month from the expiration date of the prior protocol unless a renewal protocol is submitted 
during that month. In that case, animals may remain on the HP for a total of two months from 
the expiration date of the prior protocol.  

 
8. If HP timelines elapse or if the renewal protocol is not approved, animals on the HP may be 

transferred or euthanized by the AV or the animal care staff. In the case of wildlife studies, it 
may not be appropriate to euthanize the animals. In such cases, the investigator may release 
the animals in accordance with any applicable guidelines and regulations.  



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 3 

 
9. Timelines for other situations will be established by the Attending Veterinarian on a case by 

case basis.  


