
 The University of Mississippi   

Page 1 of 2 

 

Creation, Suspension, Deletion and Review of Graduate Degree 

Programs 
 

The following are guidelines for the creation, suspension, deletion, and review of graduate programs.  

 

1. The creation of a new graduate program must follow guidelines stated by the Mississippi 

Institutions of Higher Learning (IHL). This includes consideration of state-wide program duplication, 

student demand, and the availability of resources.  

 

2. New graduate programs must be approved by a group of core graduate faculty, which will usually 

be an academic department, and must be endorsed by the Dean of the school or college administering 

the program. For a program that spans departments, schools, or college, approval by each unit is 

expected, though a majority vote of an appropriately defined graduate faculty body will be taken as 

approval.  

 

3. There must be sufficient core faculty to teach the graduate courses and to supervise research and 

creative activities of the students in the program. For this purpose, the core faculty group for a 

program should comprise at least four full-time, qualified faculty members. Qualified faculty must be 

members of the Graduate Faculty, as described in the Graduate Faculty Policy. For a new doctoral 

program, the core faculty group must include at least one full member of the Graduate Faculty.  

 

4. Emphasis areas of a degree program should adhere to the same standard regarding core faculty and 

the same procedures for approval, suspension and deletion.  

 

5. The approval process for new graduate programs involves endorsement by the Graduate Council 

and the Council of Academic Administrators, and approval by the Chancellor. In general, the 

following type of information should be provided to the Graduate Council: proposed curriculum; 

names and qualifications of the core faculty; evidence of appropriate approvals by the faculty; 

evidence of student demand and a projected enrollment; resources (e.g., office/laboratory space, 

library holdings, stipends, new faculty lines, etc.); impact on other programs; availability of courses 

(or needed new courses); admissions criteria; a program management plan; and appropriate 

information about the thesis/dissertation and examination processes. All degree programs must be 

consistent with the Graduate School’s general academic rules governing master’s, specialist, and 
doctoral programs. Any new program should also be consistent with the mission of the University. 

The process must follow IHL procedures, which involves a pre-approval request and a formal request 

at particular times of the year.  

 

A separate set of guidelines apply for the approval of graduate certificate programs.  

 

6. It is not necessary to have new courses pre-approved by the Graduate Council, but a convincing 

case must be made that adequate courses can be delivered. When the proposed program involves 

existing courses, an explanation should be given regarding the scheduling of such courses, including 

those that might be taught outside the department proposing the new program. Also, any internal 

reallocation of resources (e.g., space, stipends, teaching loads, etc.), needed to deliver the new 

program, should be explained.  

 

The ability to offer graduate courses in a timely manner is an important criterion for approval of a 

new program.  

 

7. Recommendations to delete a graduate program should be made with the approval of the 



 The University of Mississippi   

Page 2 of 2 

 

appropriate core faculty members, school/college Dean, Graduate Council, and Academic Council. 

However, deletion of a program may be an administrative decision based on limitations of resources 

(including faculty), an IHL dictate, or a review of the program’s academic quality or student demand. 

If a program is deleted, the students who are currently in the program should be given the 

opportunity to complete the program, if possible, at UM.  

 

Suspension of a program refers to suspension of admission of new students. The Graduate School 

may suspend a program following a recommendation from the core faculty group and appropriate 

Dean. A suspension may be an initial step before deletion or it may be a step to manage the flow of 

applicants.  

 

8. Each department will identify a Graduate Program Coordinator and a list of core faculty for the 

new program.  

 

9. All departments proposing programs must identify learning outcomes, must be prepared to provide 

evidence that independent learning is fostered and that the educational requirements are 

progressively more advanced that those of undergraduate programs, and must participate in the 

University’s assessment processes. Graduate programs that have professional accrediting agency 

must seek and maintain accreditation. Additionally, a periodic review of graduate programs may be 

performed under the direction of the Provost, Graduate Dean, or line Dean. 

 

 

 

 

Revised April 16, 2018 


