
Policy Code ACA.CP.100.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
  1 

Generated on 01/31/2013 at 11:48:06 CST See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. 

The University of Mississippi  
  

Approval Process for Curricular and Course   
Changes, Additions, or Deletions   

   
  
Summary of Process  
Proposals for curricular and course changes, additions, or deletions must be approved by the 
department or program faculty and the relevant College or School.  If the matter concerns 
undergraduate courses or programs, then it is routed to the Undergraduate Council.  If the matter 
concerns graduate courses or programs, then it is routed to the Graduate Council.  Minutes from 
the Undergraduate Council and Graduate Council must be considered for approval by the 
Council of Academic Administrators, which must be approved by the Chancellor before 
becoming official.   An exception is that course changes, additions, or deletions may be 
implemented, following approval by the Undergraduate or Graduate Council, by action of 
the Provost.  
  
Department Level  
The faculty members in each department or program must approve all undergraduate curricular 
and course changes, additions, or deletions that will appear in the Undergraduate Catalog.  The 
graduate faculty members in each department or program must approve all graduate curricular 
and course changes, additions, or deletions that will appear in the Graduate Catalog.     
  
College or School Level  
Once approved by the department or program faculty, curricular and course changes, additions, 
or deletions must be considered for approval by the appropriate committee or faculty in the 
relevant College or School.  Approved agenda items are forwarded to the Undergraduate Council 
and/or Graduate Council.  Any proposals concerning 500-level courses are submitted to both 
Undergraduate and Graduate Councils.    
  
Undergraduate Council  
The Undergraduate Council has broad responsibility for advising on all undergraduate academic 
policies and activities of the University on its Oxford and satellite campus locations (excluding 
the University Medical Center).  This includes the consideration of new degree programs, 
formulation and refinement of undergraduate regulations, consideration of undergraduate courses 
for approval, and decisions on petitions from students who are requesting waivers of 
campuswide (as opposed to departmental or school) undergraduate degree requirements.   
Recommendations from the Undergraduate Council and minutes of its meetings are forwarded to 
the Provost, who presents these proposals to the Council of Academic Administrators before 
forwarding all minutes to the Chancellor for approval.   The Provost may immediately approve 
course changes, additions, or deletions, on behalf of the Council of Academic 
Administrators and the Chancellor, after these items are approved by Undergraduate 
Council.  
  



Policy Code ACA.CP.100.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
  2 

Generated on 01/31/2013 at 11:48:06 CST See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. 

The Undergraduate Council is chaired by an Associate Provost.  It is comprised of tenured, 
professorial faculty who represent the College and each school on campus; the College of Liberal 
Arts has three representatives.  The Provost’s office supervises an election process for the faculty 
representatives.  Other voting members include an undergraduate student representative, an 
Academic Computing representative, and an Outreach and Continuing Education representative.  
Nonvoting members include the Director of Admissions and Registrar, and a Library 
representative.  
  
  
Graduate Council  
The Graduate Council has broad responsibility for advising on all graduate academic policies and 
activities of the University on its Oxford and satellite campus locations (excluding the University 
Medical Center).  This includes the consideration of new degree programs, formulation and 
refinement of graduate regulations, consideration of all graduate and law courses for approval, 
and decisions on petitions from students who are requesting waivers of campus-wide (as opposed 
to departmental or school) graduate degree requirements.   
Recommendations from the Graduate Council and minutes of its meetings are forwarded to the 
Provost, who presents these proposals to the Council of Academic Administrators before 
forwarding all minutes to the Chancellor for approval.   The Provost may immediately approve 
course changes, additions, or deletions, on behalf of the Council of Academic  
Administrators and the Chancellor, after these items are approved by Graduate Council.  
  
The Graduate Council is chaired by the Dean of the Graduate School.  It is comprised of tenured, 
professorial faculty who represent each College or School on campus; the College of Liberal 
Arts has three representatives.  The Provost’s office supervises an election process for the faculty 
representatives.  There is also a graduate student representative.  Nonvoting members include the 
Vice Chancellor for Research and Sponsored Programs, and a Library representative.  
   
Council of Academic Administrators  
The Council of Academic Administrators has broad responsibility for all academic activities of 
the University on all its campuses other than the Medical Center.  The Council oversees the 
conduct of ongoing academic programs; it recommends the establishment of new programs and 
the terminations of, or changes in, existing programs.  It receives copies of minutes and 
recommendations from the Undergraduate Council, the Graduate Council, and the External 
Academic Affairs Committee.   The Council of Academic Administrators may request to the 
Provost that a recent decision regarding the approval or disapproval of a course item be 
reconsidered.  
  
The Council of Academic Administrators is chaired by the Provost/Vice Chancellor for  
Academic Affairs.  The Council is comprised of the deans from each college or school, Graduate 
School, branch campuses, library, and McDonnell-Barksdale Honors College; Vice Chancellor 
for Research and Sponsored Programs; Director of Academic Support Center; Director of 
Institutional Research; Chair of the Faculty Senate; and representatives from the Associated 
Student Body, Graduate Student Body, Undergraduate Council, and Graduate Council.   



Policy Code ACA.CP.100.001. The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 
  3 

Generated on 01/31/2013 at 11:48:06 CST See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. 

Nonvoting members include the Director of Admissions and Registrar, the Executive Director of 
Outreach and Summer Session, a representative from the Office of Information Technology, and 
an Associate Provost.    
  
Chancellor   
Once the Chancellor approves the minutes of the Council of Academic Administrators, the items 
in the minutes are officially approved.  The minutes are forwarded to the Registrar’s Office, 
Office of Publications, and the Office of Information Technology.    
  
When the Provost approves course items (changes, additions, and deletions) that are 
included in the minutes of Undergraduate Council or Graduate Council, these course items 
are forwarded to the Registrar’s Office, Office of Publications, and the Office of 
Information Technology prior to formal approval of the remaining components of these 
minutes.  


