
The University of Mississippi 
 

PROCTORED ASSESSMENT POLICY 
Web-Based or Online Courses 

 
1. Ole Miss Online students must comply with the Proctored Testing Policy for web-based or 

online courses.  

2. If an online or web-based course requires proctored assessments, then it is the responsibility 
of the individual taking the course (hereinafter “student”) to schedule proctored assessments. 

3. All proctored assessments must be taken under the supervision of an approved test site 
official (hereinafter “proctor”). 

4. All students must use a proctor who has been approved by the Department of Online 
Learning and Independent Study. 

5. The Department of Online Learning and Independent Study reserves the right to reject any 
proctor and to require the student to come to a campus of the University of Mississippi to 
take the proctored assessment. 

6. Students requesting special testing accommodations must provide copies of the appropriate 
documentation from the University of Mississippi’s Office of Student Disability Services to 
the Department of Online Learning and Independent Study no later than seven (7) working 
days prior to the student’s first proctored assessment each semester.    

7. Students who are unable to sit for a proctored assessment at the main campus or one of the 
regional campuses of the University of Mississippi must submit an “Off-Campus Exam 
Request Form” in a timely manner as outlined below. 

8. The Department of Online Learning and Independent Study should receive a student’s 
completed “Off-Campus Exam Request Form” as early as possible, but no later than seven 
(7) working days prior to the opening of the testing window for each proctored assessment.   

9. If an “Off-Campus Exam Request Form” is received after the stated deadline, it is possible 
that the exam will be received by the proctor after the appropriate testing date, thereby 
affecting the student’s grade.  Additionally, the processing fee for late submissions of the 
“Off-Campus Exam Request Form” will be $40 per exam if in the U.S. and $60 per exam if 
outside the U.S.  These fees will be charged to the student’s Bursar account. 

10. The Department of Online Learning and Independent Study can not accommodate an “Off-
Campus Exam Request Form” received less than forty-eight (48) hours before the scheduled 
exam date and time.   

11. If an exam must be sent via express mail to meet a testing deadline as a result of a student’s 
delay in submitting the completed “Off-Campus Exam Request Form” or of inaccuracies on 
the application, the express mail charges will be charged to the student’s Bursar account. 

12. It is the responsibility of the student to pay the proctor fees required by some testing centers. 

 1 
 


