
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 4 

 

 

 

Policies and Practices Related to the Acceptance of Transfer Credit for 

Undergraduate Courses 

 

When a transfer student is admitted to the University of Mississippi (UM), all transfer 

course work is evaluated and is recorded, without changes in grades, as part of the 

student’s permanent academic record. Also, matriculating UM students may take courses 

from other institutions and transfer it back to UM. The evaluation of transfer courses 

involves a determination of whether the courses are equivalent to University of 

Mississippi courses, a process referred to as equivalency determination. When a transfer 

course is found to be equivalent, this is also noted in the student’s academic record and 

the transfer course then satisfies pre-requisite requirements and degree requirements as 

an exact substitute for the University course (provided that other academic residency 

rules do not apply). Nothing in this policy affects the articulation agreement with the 

Mississippi Public Community Colleges. 

 

This policy defines terms and processes used in the evaluation of transfer work and the 

determination of its applicability to a University degree. 

 

Transferable and Equivalent Courses and the Process for Evaluation 

 

1. Non-Transferable Courses: The following types of courses are not transferable to 
the University of Mississippi. 

• courses from non-accredited universities1 

• technical/vocational courses2 

• developmental courses or other courses deemed to be below the 
post- secondary level 

• courses that promote a religious or political belief to the exclusion 
of others or courses that are determined by the appropriate academic 
department to have biased or inappropriate academic content 

 
 

2. Academic Departments determine equivalencies for courses that the 
Department teaches.  A Department may determine that a course from another 

                                                     

1 Accredited refers to a regionally (e.g., SACSCOC) accredited institution in the US higher education 
system or international institutions that are chartered by their national government or otherwise recognized 

to be similar in quality to accredited US institutions.  Whereas courses from non- accredited institutions 

are generally considered not to be transferable, exceptions to this may be considered on a course (not on 

an individual student) basis. An exception must be recommended by the academic department that offers 

the course at this institution and must be approved by the relevant dean’s office. 

 

Courses from a regionally accredited institution that does not also have a professionally accredited program 

in a given discipline are transferable. However, a UM department that has a professionally accredited 

program may consider transfer courses from such a non-professionally accredited institution as not being 

equivalent to UM courses (i.e., the courses would transfer in a non-equivalent manner). 

 
2 Whereas technical/vocational courses are considered non-transferrable, exceptions may be recommended by 

an academic unit that teaches similar courses, with approval by the cognate dean. 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 

institution 

• is equivalent to a specific UM course (thus satisfying pre-requisites and 
degree requirements); 

• is assigned generic credit within that academic department’s area at a 
given level (e.g., Engl 2xx, indicating that the course is transferable, that it 

is not equivalent to a specific UM English course, but that the transfer 

course is recognized as college level credit within the UM area of 

English).  Also see paragraph 7 for another use of the departmental 

generic prefix. 

• should be assigned generic UM credit, as explained below. 
 

Decisions made by an academic department about the equivalency of transfer courses 

may be appealed in writing by a student to the cognate dean. The decision of the dean 

will be final. 

 

3. In cases where the external course is appropriate for the post-secondary level, but 
UM does not offer a similar course or course area (e.g., Agriculture courses), 

Academic Affairs and the Registrar will accept these as UM 1xx (UM 2xx, etc.) 

courses. 

 

4. Courses accepted as transferable, whether as equivalent or generic credit, will be 
included in the overall gpa calculation for transfer work for an individual student. 

For a transfer applicant, all transferable courses presented will contribute to the 

transfer gpa, which must be 2.0 or above. That is, a transfer applicant may not 

exclude courses considered to be generic UM #xx from the calculated transfer 

gpa. 

 

5. Developmental courses and other non-transferable courses that are included on a 
transfer student’s transcript are recorded as UM 0xx credit. These courses are not 

counted toward the total transfer hours, nor are they included in the calculation of 

the transfer gpa. 

 

6. The grade and credit hours for transferable courses will be converted, to the extent 
possible, to the UM standard of a 4.0 grading scale and will be assigned no more 

hours than the equivalent UM course. Grades from institutions using plus/minus 

grading scales will be converted to the letter grade without a plus or minus. If a 

transfer course carries more credit hours than an otherwise equivalent UM course, 

the equivalency will be assigned the UM number of hours, with the remaining one 

or more hours being transferred in as generic credit within that program of study 

(e.g., a four-hour external English course might transfer in as being equivalent to 

three hours of a specific UM English course plus one hour of Eng #xx). If the 

external course has fewer hours than a similar UM course, the general procedure 

will be not to assign this external course as being equivalent, but to transfer it in as 

generic credit in the academic area (e.g., Eng #xx). 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 

 

The Registrar’s Office is responsible for recording the grades for transfer courses. 

When necessary, the Registrar’s Office will convert hours of quarter-based credit 

to semester-based credit. 

 

7. If a pair of courses is split (e.g., a lecture and lab component, as co-requisites) at 
UM but not at the external institution, both component courses must be present 

for equivalency. If only one of the components courses is present on the external 

transcript, it will be transferred in as a generic credit for that discipline. 

 

8. The Registrar, Office of Information Technology, Academic Affairs Office, and 
the academic schools/college will work together to maintain an accurate and time- 

stamped database of transferable and equivalency courses from external 

institutions.  Additions, deletions, and changes in courses, including their 

numbers, prefixes, content, and grading scale will occur at both at UM and 

external institutions. All transfer equivalency determinations for external courses 

are time-stamped in the database and are applied to individual students as the 

relevant equivalency at the time the student took the course. 

 

9. A minimum cumulative gpa of 2.0 is required for all non-resident credit 
(including UM #xx transfer credit). No more than one half of the total credit 

hours required for a degree program may be transfer credit from a junior or 

community college. 

 
10. Except as already described, the mode (including language of delivery, with one 

exception3) or location of delivery of a course or age of a course is not considered 
when assigning transferability and equivalency. 

 

11. Non-traditional credits are not transferable.  However, non-traditional credits may 
be awarded to students for credit-by-examination and military experience. If these 

non-traditional credits are included on a transfer student’s transcript, the 

University will determine the amount of non-traditional credit to be awarded by 

the same criteria as if the student had sought such credit initially at this institution 

and without regard for the amount of credit awarded by the institution from which 

the student is transferring. 

 

12. The University makes available on its web site the database of equivalent external 
courses. 

 
 

Applicability of Transferred Courses 
 

 

                                                     

3 If a non-native English-speaking student satisfies our English-language requirement for admission, he/she 

should be able to transfer in courses taken at an “accredited” international institution, even though the 

language of delivery is not English. Transferability and equivalency relates to course content, not delivery 

mode.  Exceptions would be if English language itself is the subject area. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 4 

 

 

 
 

The above definitions and guidelines apply to the determination of a database of 

transferable and equivalent courses from external institutions. If a transfer course is 

equivalent to a UM course, it is fully equivalent with regard to serving as a pre- requisite 

and satisfying a degree requirement. 

 

If a course is given generic academic area transfer credit (e.g., Eng 3xx), the course 

should count at the indicated level as an elective course in that area and contributes to 

any requirement dealing with total hours in that area (e.g., to contribute to a 

requirement of 6 hours of upper division English). 

 

If a course is assigned generic UM credit (e.g., UM 1xx), it applies to the total credit 

hour count, to the total hour count at the upper (or lower) division level, and to the non-

resident gpa (and to the gpa calculated for honors).  However, such a course will satisfy 

a degree requirement only if the program stipulates that generic UM #xx credit can 

satisfy elective credit requirements for that program. 

 
 

Display of Transfer Credit 

 

Transfer credit will be displayed on a UM student’s transcript in summary form. A 

more detailed listing of external courses and UM equivalencies (including courses 

transferred but not equivalent) is provided to academic advisors and students via a web 

presentation. 

 
 

Entry of Transfer Information 

 

The Registrar’s Office is responsible for entering transcript information for admitted 

transfer students. This will be done as timely as possible for presentation of transferable 

and equivalencies to both the students/applicants and advisors. A Transfer Equivalency 

Resource Site allows students, faculty, or the public to check the 

transferability/equivalency of external courses. 

 
 

Role of Academic Departments 

 

The need for academic departments to make equivalency determinations, for courses 

from external institutions, will continue to occur. The basic premise is that departments 

that “own” a particular subject area are responsible for making equivalency determination 

in that area. It is important for these departments to make the equivalency determination 

in a timely manner, so that students and their advisors can have available appropriate 

information about the equivalency of their transfer courses in order to register. 


