
 

 

  
 

   
 
 

 
   

  
 

    

 
 

 
  

 
 

   
 

 
    

 
 

   
 

  
  

 
   

 
 

  
 

 
 

 
  

 
  

     
 

 

The University of Mississippi 

Disciplinary Sanctions 

Summary/Purpose: To provide a nonexclusive list of potential disciplinary sanctions. 

Sanctions are designed to promote the University’s educational mission.  When developing 
sanctions, all circumstances surrounding the incident should be taken into consideration 
including aggravating or mitigating factors.  Examples of aggravating or mitigating factors 
include a student’s or organization’s prior conduct history, harm caused or danger posed to the 
University community, and/or whether the misconduct was committed because of the actual or 
perceived race, color, ancestry, ethnicity, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, 
sexual identity, gender expression, or genetic identity of a person. 

Students who fail to complete assigned sanctions in the prescribed time may experience a 
judicial hold being placed on the student’s account.  In addition to a judicial hold, students and 
organizations that fail to complete sanctions may be charged with ‘Disregard for University 
Authority’ under DSA.SC.200.010.(9). 

Students found responsible for violating University policy may receive one or more of the 
following sanctions: 

Oral Reprimand: An oral statement of disapproval with or without written follow-up 
communication. 

Written Reprimand: A written notice to the student or organization of the inappropriate nature 
of the conduct. 

Disciplinary Probation: A written reprimand to a student or organization for violation of 
specified regulations. Probation is for a definite period of time and includes the possibility of 
more severe sanctions if the student or organization is found responsible for violating any 
University rules and regulations during the probationary period. 

Social Probation: Prohibits an organization from sponsoring or participating in any organized 
social activity, party, or function. 

Loss of Privileges: Denial of specified privileges for a designated period of time. This may 
include, but is not limited to, loss of visitation rights, denial of participation in specific programs, 
denial of participation in University-related organizations or groups, denial of the right to attend 
University-sponsored events, and denial of access to campus resources or facilities. 

Fines: Monetary fines may be assigned. 

Restitution: Reasonable compensation for loss, damage, or injury to the appropriate party. 
Restitution may take the form of community service, monetary compensation, or material 
replacement. 



 

 

  
  

  
 

   
 

 
   

 
 

 
   

  
  

 
 

  
 

   
 

  
 

   
 

 
  

  
    

 
 

   
   

 
 

The University of Mississippi 

Community Service: Assignments for the benefit of the University or community. Community 
service assignments must be approved by the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct 
or other appropriate hearing body or officer. 

Assessment: A student may be required to attend sessions with a counselor for an assessment, 
either through the University’s Counseling Center, Student Health Services, or outside provider. 

Substance Abuse Education: A student may be required to meet with a substance abuse 
educator or attend programs designed to help the student deal with substance abuse issues and 
learn from the experience. 

Educational Project: Actions that will enhance the educational impact of the student 
conduct process on the student, which may include oral or written reports to the appropriate 
hearing body or officer. Educational sanctions are designed to increase the student’s 
understanding of how his or her behavior affects others. 

Loss of Recognition: A student organization may lose its recognition on campus as a registered 
student organization. The Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct, in collaboration 
with the Office of the Dean of Students will notify national or regional governing bodies with 
which the organization is associated or which sponsors social, academic, or sports events when 
such loss of recognition is imposed so that the full impact of this decision may be understood. 

Parental Notification: Parents may be notified of violations of the alcohol and drug policies if 
the student is under the age of 21. 

Suspension: Separation of the student or organization from the University for a definite period 
of time, after which the student or organization is eligible to return. Conditions for readmission 
may be specified. This sanction will be noted on the academic transcript of the student. 
Academic coursework completed during a student’s suspension will not be accepted as transfer 
credit.  

Expulsion: Permanent separation of the student or organization from the University 
Community without the possibility of readmission. This sanction will be noted on the academic 
transcript of the student. 


