
 

 

     
 

 
      

 
 

   
 

  
     

   
 

    

  
  

 
   
  
   
 

  
 

 
 

 
   

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
 

The University of Mississippi 

Initiation of University Conduct Proceedings
 
DSA.SC.300.002
 

Summary/Purpose: To describe the initiation of nonacademic conduct proceedings. 

Any member of the university community may submit a complaint alleging a violation of 
University policies. All complaints must be submitted to the Office of Conflict Resolution and 
Student Conduct in writing.  Complaints should include the date of the alleged violation and 
facts to support that a violation of university policy has potentially occurred. Any complaint 
should be submitted as soon as reasonably possible after the event occurs. 

The Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct will review the allegations in the 
complaint to determine whether the University has jurisdiction.  If the University has jurisdiction 
over the conduct, the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct will respond in one of 
the following manners: 

(1) Assign charges to the student or organization identified in the complaint; 
(2) Refer parties involved in the complaint to alternative dispute resolution; or 
(3) Determine that the complaint warrants no further action and dismiss the complaint. 

The determination to initiate University charges is final and not appealable.  All allegations of 
sexual assault, sexual harassment, or relationship violence will be referred to the University’s 
Title IX coordinator in the Office of Equal Opportunity and Regulatory Compliance or his or her 
designee. 

In addition, the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct may assign charges on behalf 
of the University to a student or organization based on information received in a police report or 
court docket regarding conduct on or off campus, an incident report submitted by a member of 
the Department of Student Housing staff, or a report submitted to the Office of Conflict 
Resolution and Student Conduct from a University department or community member. 

The Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct may dismiss a complaint at any stage if it 
reasonably believes that the complaint is baseless, unsupported, or is more educational if 
resolved in a different manner. 


