
	

	

Student Organizations Overview 
DSA.DS.400.001 

 
Student organizations that obtain official recognition from the University of Mississippi are 
referred to as Registered Student Organizations (RSOs). 
   
This policy outlines the rights and privileges RSOs are afforded, provides an overview of how to 
create a RSO, and details University expectations of RSOs. 
 
All student organizations are subject to University policies and may face disciplinary action 
through the Office of Conflict Resolution & Student Conduct for violating such policies and 
other guidelines applicable to RSOs. 
 
Rights and Privileges of Registered Student Organizations 
All RSOs are afforded certain rights and privileges. Registered student organizations:  
 

• May reserve available University facilities without charge or at discounted rates; 
• May sponsor certain activities both on and off campus; 
• Have the right to participate in numerous University-sponsored events including, but not 

limited to, Rebel Roundup at Orientation, and the Get Involved Fair; 
• May request funding support from the Associated Student Body (ASB) and/or request 

funding support from University offices and departments; 
• May apply for resources (i.e., space or storage) in the Ole Miss Student Union; 
• May receive assistance with marketing events through the Ole Miss Student Union, 

including a listing of the organization’s name, contact information, and social media.  
 
Application to Create a Registered Student Organization 
Enrolled students desiring to form a RSO may complete an application to create a Registered 
Student Organization at any time. After signing in with a University Web ID & password, 
students are able to apply for a new student organization via the University’s student 
organization management website, the Forum (www.olemiss.edu/forum). The virtual application 
requires the following:  
 

• Names and University email addresses of student members (minimum of three) and 
designated leaders making the request; 

• Name and University email address of a full-time University faculty and/or staff member 
who has agreed to 1) serve as the organization’s advisor and 2) will sign an agreement 
outlining expectations; 

• A constitution; and 
• A risk management assessment (banking, travel, events, national affiliation information, 

etc.). 
 



	

	

All new RSOs will be required to attend Registered Student Organization Orientation, which is 
held monthly.  
 
Annual Renewal for Registered Student Organizations 
All University of Mississippi RSOs are required to renew their organization annually. This 
process is completed via the Forum. All RSOs must renew during their indicated month of 
officer transition (as indicated by the RSO’s prior renewal).  
 
The following information must be updated during the Annual RSO Renewal: 
 

• Notification of any changes, additions, or edits made to the RSO’s constitution since the 
last renewal; 

• Changes to the RSO’s contact information and basic profile; 
• Updated roster information reflecting the membership and advisor of the RSO; 
• Updated risk management assessment. 

 
RSOs that fail to complete RSO Renewal by the established deadline will be declared inactive 
and will forfeit the rights and privileges granted to RSOs until the renewal is completed.  
 
Registered Student Organization Orientation 
Registered Student Organization Orientation is coordinated by the Ole Miss Student Union.  
RSO Orientation is a required training that is held monthly, although RSOs only attend one 
orientation annually. Orientation sessions provide members of RSOs an overview of RSO 
expectations, available resources, pertinent dates and events, and the opportunity to ask desired 
questions.   
 
Registered Student Organizations are required to have at least two members of their organization 
who are listed on the registration or renewal attend at least one RSO Orientation annually.  At 
least one of these individuals must be a member of the RSO’s executive leadership (the 
equivalent of what would be considered the president, vice president, treasurer, or secretary).  If 
the RSO cannot arrange appropriate attendance at the RSO Orientation due to extenuating 
circumstances, alternative arrangements can be made with the Assistant Director of Student 
Organizations within the Ole Miss Student Union.  In cases where an RSO does not meet this 
requirement, that RSO may be declared inactive and will forfeit rights and privileges granted to 
RSOs.  
 
Registered Student Organization Digital Platform 
The Forum (www.olemiss.edu/forum) is the official digital platform for RSO operations.  
TheForum may be accessed by logging into the following link using a student WebID and 
password. 
 
Student Organization Handbook 



	

	

The University of Mississippi Policy Directory is the official governing document of the 
University, and RSOs are responsible for knowing and understanding the policies of the 
University of Mississippi. Any additional requirements for RSOs are outlined in the Student 
Organization Handbook. Registered Student Organizations that fail to follow the policies and 
guidelines set forth in these documents may forfeit the rights and privileges granted to RSOs.  
 
Registered Student Organization Classifications 
 
All Registered Student Organizations at the University of Mississippi must comply with 
University policies. If an RSO is given “sponsored” status, additional policies and procedures 
may be applicable. 

 
Sponsored Registered Student Organizations 
The Ole Miss Student Union may designate a RSO as a Sponsored RSO. Sponsored 
RSOs are those Registered Student Organizations that work closely enough with a 
University department to receive direct support, endorsement, and/or supervision.  
 
Sponsored RSOs must list the full-time professional staff or faculty member whose job 
description designates him/her as the primary adviser on the RSOs roster. Such advisers 
are considered experts within the respective RSO’s area of interest.  
 
Sponsored RSOs are afforded certain additional benefits, such as access to a University 
Account, designated space (upon application and when available), and publicity 
opportunities.  
 
Sponsored RSOs are also subject to additional policies and practices affiliated with 
associated University departments. This includes, but is not limited to, risk assessment 
and management training, budget reconciliation, community service requirements, 
fundraising expectations, membership dues, and officer elections.  

 
General Registered Student Organizations  
The Ole Miss Student Union defines General RSOs as those not affiliated with nor 
receiving direct support, endorsement, and/or supervision from any University 
department. General RSOs must still have an actively involved faculty/staff advisor.  
 
The University registers but does not support or endorse the purposes of these general 
organizations beyond normal activities and functions granted to any other 
organization and may not accept responsibility or liability for the activities undertaken 
by the Registered Student Organization. 

 
On-Campus Housing 
Registered Student Organizations will not be officially recognized by the University, may lose 
official University recognition as a RSO, or may face other penalties or sanctions if it occupies 



	

	

an on-campus facility that is not equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system to be 
in compliance with the National Fire Code (NFPA) Standard 13 as published by the National 
Fire Protection Association. 
 
Use of University Logos 
With prior permission RSOs may use the University’s marks, logos, insignia, and trade dress in 
connection with the organization or its events if they receive such permission from the 
University of Mississippi Department of Licensing. Additional information regarding University 
guidelines for using licensed information and/or graphics of the University may also be located 
by going to the following website: (http://csm.olemiss.edu/licensing). 
 

 

  

	


