
	

	

Registered Events 
DSA.DS.400.003 

 
Registered Student Organizations (RSOs) may sponsor a wide variety of events that include but 
are not limited to educational speakers, field days, races, social events, service opportunities, 
demonstrations, fundraisers, and other events. Events are encouraged when complementary to 
the academic mission of the institution. To achieve this end, the University has established 
guidelines for sponsorship, promotion, and execution of RSO events. 
 
Registered Student Organizations are expected to follow the guidelines presented in this policy 
and all other University policies. Violations of any regulations may result in sanctions or 
discipline through the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct. 

The event registration process is managed by the Ole Miss Student Union via the online student 
organization website, the Forum (www.olemiss.edu/forum). The entire registration process must 
be completed at least 15 business days prior to the event taking place. The required 15 
business days does not include the date of the event, recognized University holidays that fall on 
business days, or days that the University is closed.  
 
All meetings with appropriate University departments must be completed before an event’s 
registration is considered complete and must also be concluded at least 15 days prior to the 
event; the University Police Department, Fire Protective Services, Parking & Transportation, the 
Department of Facilities Management, and the Department of Landscape Services are examples 
of some of the departments that may require meetings before an event’s registration is complete.  
 
Events Requiring Registration 
Registered student organizations must register an event if the event meets ANY (one or more) of 
the following criteria: 

• Alcoholic beverages will be present at the event; 
• More than 150 individuals are expected to be in attendance at the event; 
• The event will be held outdoors; 
• The event is open to off-campus guests; and/or 
• The event will take place outside the Lafayette, Oxford, and University (LOU) area. 

An RSO sponsored event occurring anytime of the year (including summer) must be registered if 
it meets any one of the above criteria.  

The only exception to the event registration requirement shall be regularly-scheduled meetings 
and regularly-scheduled meals. Registered Student Organizations should provide the Ole Miss 
Student Union notice of any such regularly-scheduled meetings or meals via the RSO renewal 
process in order for these events and meals to be exempted from this policy.  

Time Restrictions for Events  



	

	

For organization events taking place on-campus Sunday through Thursday, the end time is 
12:00am (midnight). The end time for on-campus events taking place Friday or Saturday is 1:00 
am.  
 
Events with alcohol may not extend beyond five consecutive hours.  
 
Scheduling of Events 
The University of Mississippi is an institution of higher learning, and no event shall interfere 
with the academic mission of the institution. For this reason, no RSO shall be permitted to 
register, schedule, or host an event that will detract from the University’s academic mission. The 
following scheduling limitations are applicable to all RSOs: 

• Events cannot be scheduled during Dead Week nor during final examinations. This 
includes on-campus and off-campus events.   

• Events taking place on-campus or off-campus cannot be scheduled at times that conflict 
with official University sponsored events, including but not limited to, University 
Commencement and New Student Orientation. 

• Events scheduled to take place on-campus at times when the University is closed due to 
inclement weather or other unforeseen circumstances may not continue at the scheduled 
time. The Ole Miss Student Union will work with organizations impacted by this 
requirement to reschedule the event as quickly as possible. 

• Events held on-campus where alcohol will be present will be limited to no more than five 
scheduled overlapping events on the same date. 

• The number of events scheduled on any given date may be limited due to finite resources 
and/or other University scheduled events that require the use of University resources.  

Event Monitors 
The consideration of event monitors is a part of event registration. Event monitors are required 
when an event will include the presence of alcohol. For these events, one event monitor must be 
present for every 50 guests.   

Event monitors must be enrolled students and members of the RSO sponsoring the event. The 
University has the following expectations for event monitors at registered events: 

• Wear identifiable badges provided by the Ole Miss Student Union. 
• Remain sober for the duration of the event. 
• Be present at the event’s start time through the end time of the event. 

All event monitors must complete Event Monitor Training.  Event Monitor Training will take 
place regularly throughout the academic year.  

Events Involving Alcohol 
Registered Student Organizations hosting events where alcohol may be present must adhere to 
all local, state, and federal laws, University of Mississippi policies, and all other policies outlined 
within the Student Organization Handbook, particularly the University’s Alcohol policy.  



	

	

Additionally, RSOs allowing the lawful consumption of alcohol at any event should be familiar 
with Mississippi’s Social Host Law (Reference Miss. Code Ann. § 97-5-49 (2011)). 

The hosting RSO should implement a sound risk management plan and will conform to the 
following standards and requirements: 

• Provide written permission (i.e. contract) from the venue/vendor in which the event will 
be held.  

• Adhere to venue occupancy as determined by the Fire Marshal.  
• Identify attendees who are 21 years of age or older.  
• Provide adequate security personnel as specified by the University Police Department 

during the event’s security consultation. The security personnel must be identifiable and 
employed by a bonded security company.  

• Develop, maintain, and share an attendance tracking process. 
• In addition to the above guidelines, RSOs affiliated with a national organization are also 

expected to follow their national organization’s risk management policies, guidelines, 
and/or practices. In situations where there may be conflicting or different expectations 
between the national organization and the University of Mississippi, the RSO is expected 
to follow the more strict policy. 

Restrictions for Events Held in Academic Buildings Where Alcohol Will Be Present   

1. Posted signs in the area of the event should state the start time and end time for the 
event. 

2. RSOs must specify how attendees who are 21 years of age or older will be identified.   
3. RSOs must provide adequate security personnel as specified by the University Police 

Department during the event consultation. The security personnel must be identifiable 
and employed by a bonded security company. Applicability of required security will 
be determined on a case-by-case basis.  

Restrictions for On-Campus Events Held in Non-Academic Buildings & Off-
Campus Events Where Alcohol Will Be Present 

1. Posted signs in the area of the event should state the start time and end time for the 
event. 

2. RSOs must identify attendees who are 21 years of age and older with wristbands. The 
only means of removing the wristband must be cutting or tearing to prevent transfer 
to attendees who are under age 21.  

The Ole Miss Student Union reserves the right to make additions to the standards outlined above.  

Common Transportation to Off-Campus Venues  

Registered Student Organizations traveling in groups larger than 15 are strongly encouraged to 
use common transportation provided by a chartered transportation company (vans, charter 
service, shuttles, etc.). In addition to the event registration submission, the contract from the 



	

	

common transportation provider must be provided to the Ole Miss Student Union as part of the 
event registration process.  

The name and contact information for an individual who is not traveling with the group should 
also be provided. The Ole Miss Student Union will look to this individual for information and 
assistance in the case of an emergency.  

RSOs are responsible for providing a safe and orderly boarding and drop-off procedure.  
Additionally, the RSO is expected to provide appropriate clean-up of the boarding and unloading 
area as appropriate and necessary. 

RSOs are responsible for communicating parking arrangements for vehicles that will be parked 
on campus during the event. Parking vehicles in unapproved locations may result in personal 
vehicles being towed from the location at the owner’s expense.  

Failure to meet any of the requirements listed in this policy will result in referral to the Office of 
Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct. 

 

 

 

  


