
The University of Mississippi 

Student Complaints 

DSA.DS.100.003 

Summary/Purpose: To provide a process for timely addressing student complaints. 

Students at the University have the right to complain, whether verbally or in writing, regarding 

any area of academic or student life without fear of coercion, harassment, intimidation, or 

reprisal from the University or its employees.  Students also have the right to expect a timely 

response to any complaint. Defamatory or baseless charges may cause a student to be held 

responsible for violations of University policies or for action through the courts. 

Student concerns should be resolved at the lowest possible University unit that has the authority 

to act as quickly as practicable.  Because no single process can serve the wide range of possible 

complaints, the University provides specific processes for responding to certain kinds of student 

complaints.  Where University policy provides a specific complaint or grievance procedure, an 

aggrieved student should use that procedure. 

Examples of established procedures for specific types of student complaints: 

 University Conduct Process

 Traffic Appeals

 Grade Appeals

 Academic Discipline

 Financial Aid

 Mississippi Residency

 Sexual Harassment

 Discrimination

 Housing

 Scholarships

 Academic Standing.

 Conduct (Institutional or Agents of the Institution)

General Complaint Procedures for Students 

Students may use the following procedures to formally question the application of any 

University regulation, rule, policy, requirement or procedure, not otherwise covered by a more 

specific policy or procedure. 



The University of Mississippi 
 

 

 

Step One: 
The student should meet with the University decision-maker concerned to discuss the 

complaint and to attempt to arrive at a solution. This meeting should occur no later than 

30 calendar days after the action which resulted in the complaint. 

 

Step Two: 
If the student’s complaint is not resolved at Step One, that student must, within 14 

calendar days of the Step One meeting, submit a written complaint to the next level in the 

University’s administrative structure (department chair, director or his/her designee in the 

administrative unit within which the complaint originated).   The complaint must be 

signed and dated by the student. The name and title of the person to whom the request 

should be addressed can be obtained from the employee in Step One. 

 

If the student’s issue cannot be resolved by the Step Two administrator by telephone call 

or email correspondence, he or she shall make a reasonable effort to arrange for a 

meeting with the student and the employee within 14 calendar days from the date that the 

request is received.  If this timeframe cannot be met, the Step Two administrator will 

notify all parties in writing and determine a mutually agreeable time. The meeting should 

be informal, with a candid discussion of the problem in an attempt to find a solution. The 

Step Two administrator may give an oral decision at the close of the meeting, or he or she 

may choose to take the matter under advisement.  Typically, the Step Two administrator 

will render a final decision within 14 calendar days, informing all parties of the decision 

in writing. 

 

Step Three 
If the student wishes to appeal the Step Two decision, he or she may appeal to the dean or 

vice chancellor at the next level in the administrative structure of the University within 14 

calendar days from the date of the Step Two written decision. The student may obtain 

from the employee in Step One or Step Two the name and title of the person to whom the 

request should be addressed. 

 

The appeal must be in writing, signed and dated.   Upon receiving this written appeal, the 

Step Three administrator will review all information concerning the complaint and appeal 

and render a written decision within 14 days from the date of receipt of the appeal. The 

Step Three administrator’s decision is final. 

 

The following describes additional steps for students enrolled in University of Mississippi 

supported distance education programs under the auspices of the State Authorization 

Reciprocity Agreement also referred to as SARA. 

 

Students who have complaints related to academic or administration actions at The 

University of Mississippi who have exhausted the avenues described in process included 

in this policy and who have resolved that the complaint cannot be resolved internally 

may file a formal complaint with the Mississippi Commission on College Accreditation 

using the MCCA Student Complaint Form within two years of the incident. Note: this 

process is not applicable for matters related to student grades or discipline/conduct 

matters. 

 

In all cases, if the final decision requires any change to an official record of the University, the 

University employee must comply with all University regulations and procedures necessary to 

accomplish the change. 


