
	

	

Free Inquiry, Expression, and Assembly 
DSA.DS.100.001 

 

Students are encouraged to freely examine and exchange diverse ideas both inside and outside 
the classroom. In doing so, however, students and others must comply with other, generally 
applicable, University policies.  

Speaker’s Corners: To facilitate robust debate and the free exchange of ideas, the University 
has established high visibility areas on campus as “Speaker’s Corners” that may be used for 
personal expression by any person including non-students and other campus guests. This use 
may be without permission from the University so long as the area has not been previously 
reserved or scheduled for a particular function, no sound amplification is used, and the 
participants do not violate other University policies. Speaker’s Corners are not available for use 
for organized demonstrations except as provided below under the section of this policy 
addressing Organized Student Demonstrations. 

Designated Speaker’s Corners include:  

a) the Union Plaza adjacent to the Grove, 

b) the area surrounding the flagpole in the Lyceum Circle, and 

c) the plaza in front of Fulton Chapel.  

In the event of closure of any of these areas due to construction, the University maintains 
the right to find an alternate, equally visible location to serve as a Speaker’s Corner. 

Although it is not necessary for a person using one of the designated Speaker’s Corners to obtain 
prior permission from the University, the University encourages such persons to contact the 
Office of Leadership and Advocacy for scheduling purposes to minimize possible conflicts. 

While the University is committed to free expression, there should also be the expectation 
that campus guests abide by the following guidelines including, but not limited to, 
Disorderly Conduct (DSA.SC.200.015), Harassment (DSA.SC.200.0025), and Noise 
Level Violations (DSA.SC.200.070). 

Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as limiting the right of student expression elsewhere 
on the campus so long as the expressive activities or related student conduct do not violate any 
other applicable University policies.  

Organized Student Demonstrations:  

If a student or student organization intends to initiate, sponsor, or host a demonstration or event 
that is outdoors, is promoted in advance, may draw a large crowd, may require security, may 
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic, includes a parade, march, or other similar activity, or may 
pose a substantial risk of disrupting the functioning of the University or of violating any other 
University policy, the University requires the student or student organization to contact the 
Office of Leadership & Advocacy in order to register the event, as articulated in the Application 



	

	

for Registered Events Policy (DSA.DS.400.004). A representative of that Office will work with 
the requesting student or student organization to either meet the request or find a suitable time 
and location that balances the rights of the requesting student or student organization with the 
rights of others and the University’s educational mission.  

The purpose of this policy is not to designate University streets and common areas as a public 
forum or to accommodate demonstrations or protests by those who are not part of the University 
community (non-students and other campus guests). Rather, the purpose of this policy is to 
promote and facilitate student expression while allowing the University to make any necessary 
arrangements (such as arranging parade route, providing security) to assure such activities do not 
interfere with the University’s mission and operations or with the rights of others.  If an outside 
group (a group that is not comprised of enrolled University of Mississippi students) wishes to 
conduct an organized demonstration or outdoor event, the group should seek the sponsorship of a 
University of Mississippi registered student organization or University department. 

Masks, Props, Disguise Materials 

As a reasonable restriction on the time, place, and manner of expression and to ensure personal 
safety, the University reserves the right to prohibit the wearing of masks, personal disguises and 
other means of concealing one’s identity and to prohibit the possession of weapons, props or 
items that may be used as weapons, or protective gear on the University campus and/or at 
University events. 

Handbills, Posters, Flyers, Banners, and Signs  

Building mayors or other University officials may designate areas in classrooms and/or in or 
around University buildings for students or student organizations who wish to post handbills, 
posters, flyers, banners, signs, and other similar items on campus. However, The University of 
Mississippi prohibits the posting or display of these items by students or student organizations 
outside of these designated areas, including on the exterior of any University building, 
telephone/utility pole, tree, sidewalk, window, trash can, or any other exterior surface located on 
the campus, including vehicles. Requests to post fliers within on-campus housing must be 
submitted to the Department of Student Housing.  

Use of Chalk   

The University of Mississippi limits the use of sidewalk chalk, sidewalk art, and other sidewalk 
chalk displays to University departments and offices for messages in support of University 
events or activities.  Sidewalk chalk should not be used on University structures or buildings, 
including but not limited to steps, verandas, porches, monuments, and columns. 

 

	


