
 

 

      
 

 
   

    
 

 
 

  
   

 
 

  
 

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
 

 
 

 
  

 
 

 
  

  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

The University of Mississippi 

Arson, Explosive Devices, and Emergency Equipment
 
DSA.SC.200.050
 

Summary/Purpose: To promote good stewardship of resources and respect for the dignity of 
others by protecting property and people from harm as the result of fire and inherently dangerous 
activities. 

The unauthorized setting of fires, use of explosive devices, and misuse of emergency equipment 
are prohibited at The University of Mississippi.  Below is a nonexclusive list of prohibited action 
under this policy. 

1.	 The University prohibits the attempt to set, the setting of, or the adding to unauthorized 
fires on University property. 

2.	 Any student found willfully to have tampered with, damaged, or misused any fire 
protection equipment, initiated a false alarm, negligently discharged a fire extinguisher, 
or set fire in a residence hall or any other facility on the University campus may be 
expelled from the University and held responsible for the cost of all damages. In addition 
to disciplinary action through the University conduct system, students and/or their 
nonstudent guests who engage in such activity may be subject to criminal prosecution 
and civil liability. 

3.	 Occupants of all University facilities have a responsibility to follow the directions and 
directives of the chief of the Oxford Fire Department, or a designated representative, and 
University personnel during fire emergencies as well as unannounced fire drills and 
practice evacuations. The failure or refusal to cooperate will constitute a breach of 
regulations and is subject to disciplinary action. 

4.	 The University prohibits the possession, use, or threatened use of explosive devices, 
materials, or chemicals, including, but not limited to, firecrackers, cherry bombs, bottle 
rockets, and dynamite. 

5.	 Any student found willfully to have tampered with, damaged, or misused any campus 
emergency protection equipment or initiated a false alarm may be expelled from the 
University and held responsible for the cost of all damages. In addition to disciplinary 
action through the University conduct system, students and/or their nonstudent guests 
who engage in such activity may be subject to criminal prosecution and civil liability. 

Students who act inconsistently with this policy and values identified in this policy will be 
subject to conduct charges and proceedings. 


