
   
 

 
  

 
 
 

  
 

 

 

 

  
 

 
 

 
 

  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
   

 
 

 
 

   
   

 
 

 
   

 

university Conduct Process
 
DSA.SC.300.010
 

Summary/Purpose: To describe the University conduct process from notice of allegation 
through the appellate process. 

Below is the outline for the complete University conduct process.  

1.! Notice of Allegations 
When a charge is initiated against a student or recognized student organization, the Office of 
Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct, or Department of Student Housing, sends the 
involved student(s) or organization written notification in the form of an email or letter to 
meet with a representative of that department for an intake meeting.  This notice will inform 
the student of the specific policy, rule, or regulation that the student or organization is charged 
with allegedly having violated; the date, time, and place of the intake meeting; and any other 
information deemed pertinent to the specific case.      

2.! Intake Meeting 
At the intake meeting, a representative of the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student 
Conduct or Student Housing will review student rights and responsibilities and discuss the 
charges with the respondent. Generally, with the consent of all parties involved, some cases 
may be resolved through an administrative agreement between the respondent and the Office 
of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct.  When appropriate, some cases may be referred 
for alternative dispute resolution or referred to the appropriate governing body for the student 
organization.  Generally, if all parties do not consent on the form of resolution, the case will 
be forwarded to a hearing body.  

If the parties agree for the case to be resolved by an administrative agreement, the respondent 
waives all right to appeal, and the outcome and sanctions assigned in an administrative 
agreement are final.  

3.! Notice of Hearing 
If a student will participate in a hearing before a panel of the University Judicial Council, the 
student will be provided written notice of the charges and the date, time, and place of the 
hearing. 

4.! Hearing Process 
Below are hearing procedures of the University Judicial Council; similar procedures will be 
followed for all hearing bodies within the University conduct system. These procedures 
assume an intake meeting has taken place or that the Office of Conflict Resolution and 
Student conduct or other conduct officer has determined that the case should immediately be 
forwarded to a panel for hearing.  

a.! Hearings held through the University conduct system are closed to the public.  



  

 
   

 
   

 
 

 
   

 
  

  

 
 

 
  

    
  

 
  

 
  

   
   

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  
 

 
 

 

b.!	 Student conduct hearings are not intended to be adversarial but educational, and 
conducted in an atmosphere of informality and fairness.  Formal rules of process, 
procedure, and/or technical rules of evidence such as those applied in criminal or civil 
court are not used in the university conduct process. 

c.!	 The chair of the hearing panel, with the support of the Office of Conflict Resolution 
and Student Conduct or other hearing officer, shall notify all interested parties of the 
hearing, their rights at the hearing, and distribute copies of all relevant materials to the 
parties and members of the hearing body before the hearing.  The chair will preside 
over the hearing and at the beginning of the hearing, the chair will explain the process 
that will be followed. 

d.!	 During the course of the hearing, the chair of the panel, with the support of the Office 
of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct, shall make all procedural and evidentiary 
determinations, which are final. 

e.!	 In determining whether the charged party is responsible for violations of University 
policy, the University conduct system may consider information upon which 
institutions normally make academic and business judgments including, but not 
limited to, pertinent records, exhibits, and oral and written statements. 

f.!	 If the University charges a student based upon the student’s criminal conviction by 
any trial court of competent jurisdiction, the criminal conviction may be accepted as a 
final factual determination that the student has violated applicable University policy.  
The function of the University’s conduct process shall be limited to determining the 
appropriate University sanction. 

g.!	 The parties shall have the right to present information for the panel’s consideration to 
include identification of witnesses. 

h.!	 During the proceeding, complainants are responsible for supporting their complaints, 
and respondents are responsible for responding to the complaint.  All parties have the 
right to have an advisor attend the hearing; however, advisors are not permitted to 
speak or participate directly in the hearing, and are limited to speaking only to the 
party they are advising.  The parties may request to have one additional advisor at the 
hearing.  This request must be submitted in writing to the Office of Conflict 
Resolution and Student Conduct at least 72 hours before the proceeding. 

i.!	 As the parties present information for the panel’s consideration, members of the 
hearing panel (including the chair), the respondent, and the complainant, when 
applicable, may ask questions of the parties and other witnesses concerning the 
information presented or other information pertinent to the charge. 

j.!	 Refusal to respond to questions posed during a hearing may lead to an adverse 
inference by the hearing panel concerning the subject matter of the question posed, 



 
 

 
 

 

 
  

 
 

  
 

 
 

  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  
 

 
  

 

  
 

  

   
 

 

and this adverse inference, if applicable, may be one factor considered by the hearing 
panel in making its decision. 

k.!	 In a case in which the respondent accepts responsibility for the charge, the hearing 
panel may proceed directly into deliberation concerning appropriate sanctions rather 
than hear evidence of the charge.  The parties will have the opportunity to make a final 
statement prior to deliberations. 

l.!	 At the conclusion of all evidence, the hearing panel will deliberate in private and will 
determine by majority vote whether it is more likely than not that the respondent 
violated University policy.  If the respondent is found responsible for misconduct, the 
hearing panel will determine appropriate sanctions.  

m.! In cases involving harm to another member of the university community, the impacted 
party will have the opportunity to provide a written impact statement.  This statement 
will be considered when determining sanctions, but only after a determination of 
responsibility is made. 

n.!	 Hearings involving several students or organizations may be consolidated if the Office 
of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct, or other hearing officer, finds that the 
issues involved arise from a common nucleus of facts and circumstances. 

o.!	 All hearings will be recorded and will be made available (in the Office of Conflict 
Resolution and Student Conduct) to the respondent or complainant upon request 
during the period in which an appeal may be filed or is pending.    

5.! Failure to Appear
 
If a student fails to attend an intake meeting, an administrative agreement meeting, or a
 
hearing before a student conduct body, the hearing may be held in the student’s absence, 

which may lead to further charges for disregard of University authority.  


6.! Appeal
 
If the decision of a University hearing body is subject to appeal, the student (whether 

respondent or complainant) or student organization must submit a written appeal to the Office
 
of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct within five (5) business days of the decision 

being appealed, unless a longer period of time is specified in writing. 


a.	 Basis for Appeal 
The chair of the Appellate Consideration Board will review the written request for 
appellate consideration, the case file, and the hearing record. In determining the merit of 
an appeal, the chair of the Appellate Consideration Board will not substitute his or her 
judgment for the decision of the university hearing body.  Determination of merit will be 
based on the following: 



 
  

  
   

 
  

  
 
 

 
 

  
  

  
 

  
 

 
 

  
 

 

 
   

  
 

 
 

 
  

 

 
 
 

 

  

   

 
 

 

i.!	 whether prescribed University disciplinary procedures were followed, including 
whether the alleged misconduct falls within the jurisdiction of the University 
conduct system; 

ii.! whether the decision reached by the University hearing body was arbitrary and 
capricious (that is, the decision was not based on substantial evidence); 

iii.! whether the sanction(s) imposed by the hearing body was appropriate for the 
violation that the student or organization was found to have committed; and/or 

iv.!	 whether new evidence exists sufficient to alter the original decision that was not 
considered at the original hearing and was not known by the charged party at the 
time of the hearing. 

b. Appellate Process 
Cases involving violations of University policy heard by any University hearing body, 
including the university Judicial Council and the Department of Student Housing Hearing 
Board, may be submitted for appellate review.  The Chancellor has delegated final 
authority of review to the Appellate Consideration Board. Once the Appellate 
Consideration Board has made a decision, the respondent and the complainant will be 
notified in writing of the appellate ruling.  

c. Appellate Decisions 
After reviewing the appeal and documents pertaining to a particular case, a panel of the 
Appellate Consideration Board may: 

i.! request additional information from the appealing party, the hearing panel, 
impacted parties;  or the complainant and respondent; 

ii.! remand the case back to the original hearing panel for reconsideration;
 
iii.! uphold the decision of the hearing panel in part or in total;
 
iv.! modify by changing the imposed sanctions; or 

v.!	 reverse the decision of the hearing panel in part or in total. 

7.! Impacted Party Notification 
The Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct will disclose to impacted parties the 
results of any disciplinary proceeding conducted by the institution. If the impacted party is 
deceased as a result of the crime or offense, the information shall be provided, upon request, 
to the next of kin of the impacted party. 

8.! Actions Including Student Holds 
If a student fails to appear in response to a notice of an intake meeting, a notice of hearing, or 
a notice to appear before any University hearing body or officer under another University 
conduct process, and/or if a student receives sanctions based on a finding that he or she was in 
violation of a University policy and has neglected to complete those sanctions, a hold may be 
placed on the student’s account.  A hold restricts a student’s ability to conduct the following 
nonexclusive list of activities:  register for classes, drop or add classes, and other 
administrative privileges.  It is within the discretion of the Office of Conflict Resolution and 
Student Conduct to place a hold and to determine under what circumstances a hold may or 
may not be released. 



 
  

 
 

  
 

 
 

 
   

 

   
 

9. For additional procedures involving cases of sexual misconduct please reference 
policy DSA.SC.200.075. 

10. Students with Disabilities 
University policy calls for reasonable accommodations to be provided to students with 
disabilities on an individualized and flexible basis as mandated in Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 
Students with disabilities who require an accommodation in order to complete any of the 
appeal or judiciary proceedings noted above should contact the University department 
handling the appeal or judiciary proceedings.  Students may also contact the Office of Student 
Disability Services for assistance and referral.  More information regarding the Office of 
Student Disability Services can be found at www.olemiss.edu/depts/sds/ or by visiting the 
Office of Student Disability Services located at 334 Martindale Student Services Center.
! 

www.olemiss.edu/depts/sds

