
 

TITLE IX STUDENT CONDUCT ADJUDICATION PROCESS 

 

 

Policy Statement  

 
The University of Mississippi strives to create a respectful, safe, and non-threatening environment 

for its students. This policy establishes appropriate procedures for Title IX violations where the 

complainant and/or respondent is a student.  

 

Title IX violations are outlined within University of Mississippi policy, ACA.EO.100.012. 

https://policies.olemiss.edu/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=12352730 

 

The investigation and resolution of complaints involving a respondent accused of a Title IX 

violation are governed by this policy, while Title IX complaints by University employees are 

governed by Policy Number ACA.EO.100.010. 

 

Reporting  

 
Any students who believe that they have experienced a potential Title IX violation may submit a 

complaint against the respondent in writing or in person to the Title IX Coordinator.  

 

Responsible employees must report any Title IX incident to the Title IX Coordinator immediately. 

Responsible employees include all University faculty and staff members, except those who work 

or volunteer in the on campus UMatter: Student Support & Advocacy unit and those with statutory 

privilege, including but not limited to those providing counseling or health care services through 

the University Counseling Center, Student Health Services, and/or Psychological Services Center. 

   

Those who work or volunteer in the UMatter: Student Support & Advocacy unit as well as those 

with statutory privilege, including but not limited to those providing counseling or health care 

services through the University Counseling Center, Student Health Services, and/or Psychological 

Services Center are considered confidential employees for the purposes of this policy. Confidential 

employees are not required to report an incident to the Title IX Coordinator unless there is a 

reasonable threat to campus safety. 

 

While maintaining an individual’s confidentiality, the UMatter: Student Support & Advocacy 

staff must report the nature, date, time, and general location of an incident to the Title IX 

Coordinator. This limited report – which includes no information that would directly or 

indirectly identify the complainant – helps keep the Title IX Coordinator informed of the general 

extent and nature of sexual violence on and off campus so the coordinator can track patterns, 

evaluate the scope of the problem, and formulate appropriate campus-wide responses. Before 

reporting any information to the Title IX Coordinator, the UMatter: Student Support & 

Advocacy staff person will consult with the client to ensure that no personally identifying details 

are shared with the Title IX Coordinator. 

 

https://policies.olemiss.edu/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=12352730


   

Page 2  

Any individual who is requesting confidentiality or privacy must understand that, if the individual 

wants to maintain confidentiality or privacy, the University may be unable to conduct an 

investigation into the particular incident or pursue conduct action. Even so, the UMatter: Student 

Support & Advocacy staff will still assist the individual in receiving other necessary protection and 

support, including, but not limited to, academic accommodations; “no contact” letters; changes in 

course schedules and changes in housing assignments; and disability, health, and/or mental health 

services.  

  

Anyone who at first requests confidentiality may later decide to file a complaint with the school or 

report the incident to local law enforcement, and have the incident fully investigated.   

  

While the UMatter: Student Support & Advocacy staff may maintain a person’s privacy within the 

University, it may have reporting or other obligations under state law including an obligation to 

respond to lawfully issued subpoenas. If the UMatter: Student Support & Advocacy staff believes 

that an individual(s) may pose(s) a serious and immediate threat to the University community, the 

University Police Department may be informed so that UPD can determine if a timely warning to 

the community is appropriate. Any such warning should not include any information that identifies 

the person reporting the information.  

 

Students are encouraged to immediately contact the University Police Department (662-915-4911) 

if they have been sexually assaulted and to seek immediate medical attention. Students should seek 

medical attention even if they do not wish to pursue criminal charges or otherwise pursue a 

complaint against a respondent. 

 

The contact information for the Title IX Coordinator, the UMatter: Student Support & Advocacy 

staff, and local law enforcement is included below: 

 

 

Title IX Coordinator Post Office Box 1848  

270 D Martindale Student Services Center  

662-915-7045 

Fax:662.915.1229  

titleix@olemiss.edu  

UMatter: Student Support & Advocacy 

662-915-1059 

umatter@olemiss.edu  

 

University of Mississippi Police Department 

Kinard Hall, Wing C, Floors 2 & 3 

662-915-7234 

upd@olemiss.edu 

 

 

http://map.olemiss.edu/index.jsp?id=11257355


   

Page 3  

City of Oxford Police Department 

715 Molly Barr Road, Oxford, MS 38655 

662-232-2400 

 

Lafayette County Sheriff’s Department 

 711 Jackson Avenue East, Oxford, MS 38655 

662-234-6421 

 

Amnesty 

 
The University of Mississippi encourages the reporting of misconduct and crimes. Sometimes, individuals 

are hesitant to report to university officials or participate in processes because they fear that they 

themselves may be accused of policy violations, such as underage drinking at the time of the incident. It is 

in the best interests of this community that as many people as possible participate in investigations and 

conduct processes. To encourage participation, the University of Mississippi promotes a policy of offering  

amnesty from minor policy violations related to the incident.  

 

 

Interim Measures 

 
The investigation into a Title IX complaint is only one part of the University’s prompt and 

effective response on behalf of the complainant. The Title IX Coordinator may recommend 

immediate implementation of additional steps to provide for the safety of individuals or the 

community at large, to avoid possible retaliation, or to prevent further occurrence of any 

discrimination or discriminatory effects. These steps may include, but are not limited to academic 

accommodations; “no contact” letters; changes in course schedules and changes in housing 

assignments; and disability, health, and/or mental health services. Any such interim step taken by 

the Title IX Coordinator is not appealable, but such steps may be modified by the Title IX 

Coordinator at any time. 

 

 

 

Interim Suspension or Removal  

 
 

Under ordinary circumstances, a student investigated or charged with a violation of University 

policy shall remain free to attend class and engage in all other University functions and activities 

while conduct charges are pending. However, some or all of a student’s privileges may be limited 

or suspended by the Assistant Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs and Dean of Students on an 

interim basis, pending the outcome of the investigation or of any University conduct process. The 

Assistant Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs and Dean of Students may limit or suspend student 

privileges when it is determined that it is necessary to do so for any of the following reasons:  

 

(1) To prevent a hostile environment;  

(2) To ensure the safety and well-being of a member of the University community;  



   

Page 4  

(3) To protect the property of the University or of other members of the University 

community; or  

(4) If there is a substantial likelihood that the charged student poses a threat of 

disruption or interference with the effective operation of the University.  

 

The Assistant Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs and Dean of Students will conduct a safety and 

risk analysis based upon the reports and evidence pertaining to the individual. [This would include 

past judicial records and BIT information.] The Assistant Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs and 

Dean of Students would provide the student notice of the decision and the rationale for the 

decision. In addition, the student will have the opportunity to challenge the decision within 48 

hours of the notification of the decision of interim suspension or removal. During that time the 

student may submit documentation to support the belief that the interim suspension or removal is 

not necessary. The Assistant Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs and Dean of Students will rule as 

soon as possible, but no later than one week of the notice of interim suspension or removal. 

 

An interim measure or interim suspension does not replace the regular University conduct process, 

which shall proceed in the normal course up to and through a University conduct hearing and 

appeal, if applicable. 

 
Procedures  

 
Title IX complaints brought by a student against another student are investigated by the Title IX 

Coordinator. The adjudication of Title IX cases shall follow the process outlined in 

DSA.SC.300.001 through DSA.SC.300.015, Student Conduct Process, unless otherwise outlined 

below. The standard of proof for all cases involving Title IX will be based upon the University’s 

established standard of preponderance of the evidence.  

  

The time frames indicated below are maximums. All days are “business” days, unless otherwise 

noted. Especially in cases of sexual assault, the University will make every effort to move the case 

promptly through the process so long as such speed does not interfere with the quality of the 

investigation or the hearing.   

 

In the Student Conduct process, Title IX cases will generally be adjudicated within 90 days of the 

date that the Title IX Coordinator is notified of the complaint, unless there are extenuating 

circumstances (e.g. uncooperative witnesses, break periods and periods when the University is 

closed). The Title IX Coordinator will comply with law enforcement requests for cooperation and 

such cooperation may require the Title IX Coordinator to temporarily suspend the fact-finding 

aspect of the investigation while law enforcement is in the process of gathering evidence. The 

University promptly will resume its investigation as soon as notified by the law enforcement 

agency that it has completed the evidence gathering process, which typically takes three to ten 

business days, although the delay in the University’s investigation will be longer in certain 

instances.  

 

Both the complainant and the respondent have the right to have an advisor present throughout the 

entire process, both for the investigation and, if necessary, adjudication. At any time, complainants 



   

Page 5  

and respondents may choose their own advisors, or may request a list of advisors from the Title IX 

Coordinator or the Conduct Officer. 

 

 

Procedural steps are as follows: 

 

1. Information Gathering: The Title IX Coordinator will complete the investigation of a 

Title IX complaint generally within 60 days of receiving the complaint.  The Title IX 

Coordinator will attempt to interview the complainant and respondent of the incident. In 

addition, the Title IX Coordinator will request from both parties any information or 

evidence that would be helpful to include in the report, including names of potential people 

to interview. The Title IX Coordinator will compile all evidence into a report. The report 

will not contain findings of fact as to whether a Title IX violation actually occurred but will 

contain a summary of the investigation and all documents submitted by both parties. The 

Title IX Coordinator will review the investigation report with the complainant and 

respondent. Both parties will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence relevant to 

the incident. Once the investigation report is finalized and complete, the complainant may 

make a decision as to if a formal allegation of a violation of the Title IX policy will be 

made. If the complainant does not wish to make an allegation, the case is closed. If the 

Complainant decides to make an allegation of a violation of the Title IX Policy, the person 

may request that the report be forwarded to the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student 

Conduct for a hearing or may request a resolution other than the formal hearing process. 

The respondent will be notified by the Title IX Coordinator that an allegation has been 

made by the complainant and that the conduct process will be initiated. 

 

Informal Resolution: At any time prior to reaching a determination regarding responsibility 

the Title IX Coordinator and/or the Conduct Officer could offer an informal resolution 

process. In writing, the complainant and respondent would be notified of the allegations, 

the informal process, and the consequences resulting from the participation in the informal 

resolution process. Both parties would provide written consent that they agree to obtain an 

agreement through the informal resolution process. If parties reach an agreement during 

this process, the terms of the agreement would be put in writing and would be binding upon 

the parties. Violation of the written agreement will result in the student being charged with 

Disregard for University Authority, DSA.SC.200.010 and may result in the agreement 

being voided. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement, the investigation and/or 

conduct process will continue. 

 

2. Intake Meetings: After a report, has been submitted to the Conduct Officer and both 

parties have been notified in writing, the University will schedule individual intake 

meetings with both the complainant and the respondent generally within 65 days. During 

the intake meeting, parties will be informed of their rights and the hearing process. In 

addition, both the complainant and the respondent will receive the case file, which will 

include the investigation report, official correspondence and other information that the 

hearing panel would review.  

 



   

Page 6  

3. An administrative agreement can be offered during the intake meeting. Generally, 

with the consent of all parties involved, the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student 

Conduct may allow the respondent to accept responsibility for being in violation of the 

Title IX policy and to accept a sanction developed by the Conduct Officer. If both parties 

agree to the administrative agreement, both parties waive all rights to appeal, and the 

outcome and sanction assigned in the administrative agreement are final. 

 

If the matter will be resolved by the University Judicial Council, the Conduct Officer will 

review the process with both parties in the intake meeting and, if necessary, additional 

meetings. Both parties will be asked to provide the names of any advisors and witnesses 

who will participate in the hearing. In addition, the Conduct Officer will work with the 

complainant, respondent, and the University Judicial Council to determine the time and 

location of the hearing. Once the hearing panel is determined, a list of participating judicial 

members will be present to both parties. Both parties have the ability to request the removal 

of a member if there is a conflict of interest in that person serving on the panel. The request 

should be in writing with the reason for the request. The Conduct Officer will make a 

determination as to the potential conflict. Finally, the hearing panel will receive the names 

of the people participating in the hearing including the complainants, respondents, 

witnesses, advisors, and other panel members. Any panel member may request to the 

Conduct Officer to be removed if there is a conflict of interest. Finally, either party may 

submit additional information within five days of receiving the case file. After all material 

is submitted and added into a final case file, both parties will have a minimum of three days 

to review the final case file prior to the hearing. 

    

4. Hearing: A trained three-member hearing board, consisting of two faculty and/or staff 

members and one student, will be selected based on availability by the Office of Conflict 

Resolution and Student Conduct. A University employee of the three-member hearing 

board will preside over the hearing as chair. 

 

The complainant and/or respondent may choose to be present throughout the entire hearing. 

The complainant and/or respondent may also choose to participate in the hearing through 

the means of technology from an off-site location or at the hearing location separated from 

the other party by a barrier. A party’s refusal to be present or participate in the hearing will 

not prevent the hearing from proceeding. 

 

At the beginning of the hearing, the chair will explain the process of the hearing. During 

the proceeding, complainants are responsible for supporting their complaints, and 

respondents are responsible for responding to the complaint.  

 

All parties have the right to have an advisor attend the hearing; however, advisors are not 

permitted to speak or participate directly in the hearing and are limited to speaking only to 

the party they are advising or to request a recess. The parties may also request to have one 

additional advisor at the hearing. This request must be submitted in writing to the Office of 

Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct at least 3 days before the proceeding. The 

advisors may not hold another role in the hearing such as acting as a witness in the 

proceedings.  



   

Page 7  

 

During the course of the hearing, the chair will make all procedural and evidentiary 

determinations, which are final. Generally, all relevant information, (information used to 

prove or disprove that a Title IX violation has occurred), will be considered during the 

proceeding. Complainant and respondent must submit all questions to the chair. All 

questions submitted must be relevant. 

 

The Title IX Coordinator may be called as a witness and may present information 

regarding the investigation. As with any witness, the Title IX Coordinator will not testify or 

be asked his or her opinion but will only communicate first-hand knowledge of the 

investigation, including observations made by the Title IX Coordinator. In addition, the 

Title IX Coordinator may comment on inconsistencies found during the investigation and 

on the credibility of witnesses interviewed but may not draw conclusions 

 

Both parties may give closing statements. 

 

The decision of the hearing board and sanctions will be determined within 48 hours of the 

hearing completion. The complainant and respondent will be notified of the hearing board’s 

finding concurrently. Additionally, the complainant and respondent will receive formal 

notification of the outcome and rationale in writing. The same notification process will be 

followed for all cases under appeal. 

 

5. Appeal: The complainant and/or the respondent may appeal the findings and/or the 

sanctions of the hearing board. The process for appeal is outlined within University of 

Mississippi policy DSA.SC.300.010, Student Conduct Process. Both the complainant and 

respondent will be notified in writing of the appellate decision generally within 12 days of 

the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs receiving the appeal. 

 

The adjudication of complaints is only a part of the University’s responsibilities under Title IX. 

While a hearing board may have a hearing and pronounce sanctions for a student who violates the 

Title IX policy, the University has a broader responsibility to respond to the needs of student 

complainants. Therefore, regardless of whether a charge is brought against a student through the 

student conduct process, the Title IX Coordinator will evaluate each case to determine whether the 

overall response of the University (including resources provided or offered to the complainant and 

interim steps taken to protect the complainant and others) satisfies the requirements of Title IX. 

 

Sanctions 

 
Title IX encompasses a wide range of prohibited conduct. As such, dependent upon the facts 

unique to each case, sanctions may range from a verbal reprimand to expulsion from the 

University. Sanctions are enforced immediately upon determination of the violation. For a non-

exhaustive list of sanctions and their definitions please reference University of Mississippi policy 

DSA.SC.300.020, Disciplinary Sanctions.  

 

 

  


	Policy Statement
	Reporting
	Amnesty
	Interim Measures
	Interim Suspension or Removal
	Procedures
	Sanctions

