
 

 

      
 

 
   
 

 
 

  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

  
 

 
 

     
   

 
    

 
 

 
 

 
 

    
 

 
   

 
 

 
 

    
 

 
 

 

The University of Mississippi 

Structure of the University Conduct System
 
DSA.SC.300.001
 

Summary/Purpose: To describe the structure of the University Conduct System for non-
academic discipline. 

The University conduct system, under the direction of the Office of Conflict Resolution and 
Student Conduct and the Department of Student Housing, is composed of administrative hearing 
officers, the University Judicial Council, the Department of Student Housing hearing body, and 
the Appellate Consideration Board.  These bodies hear and/or review cases of nonacademic 
misconduct.  Cases involving academic misconduct or academic dishonesty should follow the 
separate disciplinary processes set forth by the Office of the Provost. 

With the agreement of all primary parties, the University may, at any point in the conduct 
process, offer an alternative dispute resolution option in lieu of formal student conduct 
proceedings. 

Also, incidents involving student organizations may, at any point in the conduct process, be 
referred to the appropriate governing body for resolution. 

University of Mississippi Judicial Council 
The University Judicial Council is the primary fact-finding and decision-making body in the 
University conduct system.  The Council consists of a student judicial chair, at least ten students 
(one of whom will serve as assistant student chair), at least five faculty, and at least five staff 
members.  A representative from the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct serves 
as the advisor to the council.  

The Student Judicial Chair is elected by the student body through the University’s annual 
Associated Student Body (ASB) campus-wide elections.  The remaining student members are 
selected by a process determined by the ASB.  The Student Judicial Chair shall appoint an 
assistant student chair.  

The University Judicial Council, acting through a panel of at least six members (five members 
plus the chair or assistant chair presiding), hears and decides cases involving alleged individual 
or organizational violations of University policy.  Decisions of the University Judicial Council 
are final yet subject to appeal.  For cases related to sexual misconduct, please review the conduct 
process outlined within the University’s policy on sexual misconduct. 

Appeals Process 
Outcomes involving violations of University policy heard by the University Judicial Council or 
the Department of Student Housing hearing body may be appealed to the Appellate 
Consideration Board.  Cases submitted for appeal will be considered by a panel of at least three 
members of the Appellate Consideration Board, chaired by the Vice Chancellor for Student 
Affairs or his or her designee.   



 

 

 
 

  

 
 

 
 
 
 

The University of Mississippi 

Other Hearing Bodies 
Individual colleges, schools, and professional programs may also have their own processes for 
student discipline and/or make academic judgments based on a student’s fitness for continuance 
in his or her respective program of study.  In addition, the Department of Student Housing may 
place a student’s Housing contract under review for alleged University policy violations. 


