
 

     
 

 
  

 
 

   
  

 
  

 
 

 
  

 
 

    
  

   
    

     
 

 
  

 
  
  

 
 

 
  

   
   
    

   
  

 
   

  
 

   
 

   
 

The University of Mississippi 

University Conduct System Authority and Jurisdiction
 
DSA.SC.300.015
 

Summary/Purpose: To describe the authority and jurisdiction of the University conduct system. 

The authority and jurisdiction of the University conduct system is established pursuant to the 
delegation of legal authority by the Chancellor and the Board of Trustees of State Institutions of 
Higher Learning. In Article IX, section (5) of the Bylaws and Policies of the Board of Trustees 
of State Institutions of Higher Learning, the Chancellor of The University of Mississippi is 
charged with the responsibility of maintaining appropriate standards of conduct for students and 
is authorized to expel, dismiss, suspend, and/or place limitations on continued attendance and/or 
levy penalties for disciplinary violations subject to procedures of due process. The Chancellor 
exercises this delegated authority through the University conduct system and other University 
processes. 

Student Conduct Rules and Regulations and the jurisdiction of the University conduct system 
apply to conduct that occurs on University premises, at University sponsored or 
associated events or activities, and to off-campus conduct that has institutional implications. The 
Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct will determine whether the University 
conduct system has jurisdiction to apply the student conduct rules and regulations occurring off 
campus on a case by case basis.  This determination is final.  When determining whether the 
University has jurisdiction to address off-campus student conduct, the following will be 
considered: 

Whether the student was acting as a representative of the University; 
Whether the student was traveling to or from campus; 
The degree of violence that occurred; 
Injuries to students or others; 
The extent of danger posed to the University community; 
Whether the conduct was directed at another member of the University community; 
Whether a student organization was involved; 
Whether the incident could result in a felony charge; 
Whether weapons, drugs, or alcohol were involved; 
The date of the incident; 
The conduct history of student(s) involved; 
The proximity to campus; 
Whether the student lives on campus; and/or 
The relationship the University has with the student at the time of the alleged violation. 

All students are responsible for their conduct from the time of application of admission 
through the actual awarding of a degree, even though conduct may occur between terms of actual 
enrollment and even if the conduct is not discovered until after a degree is awarded. 



 

  
  

  
 

 
 

 
   

 
 
 

The University of Mississippi 

The University conduct system is designed to further the University’s educational mission.  The 
conduct system is neither comparable to nor a substitute for any federal, state, or local criminal 
or civil court system. Even if a violation of University policy subjects a student or 
organization to criminal or civil liability, the determination of whether University policy was 
violated will be made on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence (whether it was more 
likely than not that a violation occurred). Any criminal or civil proceeding may use a different or 
higher standard of proof. It is important for students to realize that each judicial proceeding 
occurs on a separate track, and it is not necessary for any campus process to be delayed until off-
campus proceedings are completed. 


