
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The University	  of Mississippi

Disregard for University Authority
DSA.SC.200.010

Summary/Purpose: To inform	  students of their duty to exercise fairness and civility by
respecting university	  authorities who are acting	  within	  the scope of their job,	  and to
inform	  students of their duty to exercise integrity and university	  policy	  by honoring	  
conduct proceedings and processes.

University	  officials	  at the	  University	  of Mississippi	  are dedicated	  to	  nurturing	  excellence
in intellectual inquiry. When	  University	  officials	  are	  acting	  within	  the	  scope of their	  
employment, students at the University are expected to comply with reasonable
requests and to refrain from	  interfering with such requests.	   Examples of behavior that	  
are inconsistent	  with this value and policy are the following:

1. failing to comply with reasonable	  and	  lawful directions	  or requests	  of university	  
officials,	  including, but not limited to, campus police officers, security officials,
faculty,	  and	  residence	  hall staff;

2. failing to comply with a written notice to appear during any investigation,
conduct proceeding, or appeal procedure ;

3. falsifying, distorting, or misrepresenting information before a hearing body or
any university	  official prior to or	  during any investigation,	  conduct proceeding,	  or
appeal	  procedure;

4. refusing to	  respond	  to	  questions	  posed	  during any	  investigation, conduct
proceeding,	  or appeal procedure; in addition	  to disregard for university	  
authority,	  such refusal	  during	  a hearing also may lead to an adverse inference by
the hearing body concerning the subject matter of the question posed, and this
adverse inference, if applicable, may be one factor considered by the hearing
body in making its decision;

5. disrupting	  or interfering with	  any investigation,	  conduct	  proceeding,	  or appeal	  
procedure;

6. attempting to discourage an individual’s proper participation in, or use of,
conduct, complaint, or grievance	  processes;

7.	 attempting to influence the impartiality of a member of a conduct board or
hearing	  body, the charging party, a witness, or victim	  prior to, during the course
of, or after	  the	  conduct or other similar University proceeding;



 

 

 

 

 

The University	  of Mississippi

8. harassing (verbal or physical) and/or intimidating a member of a conduct board
or hearing	  body,	  the charging party, a witness, or victim	  prior to, during the
course of, or after	  the	  conduct or other similar University proceeding;

9. failing to comply with or violating the terms of conduct sanction(s);	  

10. influencing or attempting to	  influence	  another	  person to abuse conduct,	  

complaint, or grievance	  processes;

11. intentionally or recklessly submitting false accusations or charges through any
university conduct, complaint, or grievance process; and

12. attempting to bribe or influence another person with an offer of money, gifts, or
services to perform	  an act or provide a service contrary to university	  policy.

Students who act inconsistently with this value and policy will be subject to conduct
charges and proceedings.


