
The University of Mississippi 

Alcohol Service at Events Sponsored or Hosted by the University 
 

Summary/Purpose:  This policy describes the rules that apply to all University departments and 
administrative units if the department or unit plans to sponsor or host an event at which alcohol 
will be served. 
 
For purposes of this policy, “alcohol” or “alcoholic beverage” means any beverage that contains 
alcohol, without respect to the beverage’s percentage of alcohol by weight or by volume. If a 
University department or office wishes to host an event where alcohol will be served, the 
department must comply with the following guidelines. 
 

1. Source of funds for purchase of alcohol. Funds from University accounts may not be 
used to purchase alcohol.  Only funds in University of Mississippi Foundation or other 
private or outside accounts may be used by University departments or officials to 
purchase alcohol. 

2. Permits.  Any event sponsored or hosted by the University must only serve alcohol in 
compliance with all applicable state and local laws and pursuant to any and all licenses or 
permits required by law.  If the event occurs at a restaurant that is permitted to sell 
alcohol to customers on-site and the alcohol is purchased and consumed at that restaurant, 
no additional permits or licenses are typically required.  If the event occurs anywhere 
else, then the department hosting or sponsoring the event must purchase alcohol from and 
the alcohol must be served by a vendor with a caterer’s permit issued by the state tax 
commission. If the event is in the City of Oxford but the alcohol is not purchased and 
consumed at a restaurant permitted to sell alcohol, the owner of the site where the event 
occurs may also have to obtain an event permit from the City of Oxford.  

3. Campus Facilities.  Not all campus facilities or locations may be used to host events 
with alcohol service. Facilities where alcohol may be served may have location-specific 
policies with respect to which sorts of alcoholic beverages (i.e., beer, wine or other 
alcohol) may be served in that location or facility.  The department or office that manages 
or reserves a particular campus location or facility can provide University departments 
relevant information about alcohol service for that facility.  

4. Approvals.  The department or office’s signatory officer with budgetary authority must 
approve the event and the service of alcohol.  

5. Notices.  The department or office must provide notice to the Provost and to the 
Chancellor of its intent to host or sponsor an event that includes the service of alcohol, 
along with the time, place, and purpose of the event, at least one week in advance of the 
event.  When scheduling a University facility for an event with alcohol service, the 
department or office must also notify the office or department that manages or schedules 
the use of the University building or facility that alcohol will be served as a part of the 
event. 

6. County prohibition against beer and light wine.  Beer and light wine (alcoholic 
beverages available for sale at grocery and convenience stores) may not be served or 

Page 1 of 2 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

consumed at events hosted by the University that occur at any location within Lafayette 
County but outside the city limits of the City of Oxford.   

7. Game day.  University departments and offices may not host or sponsor events on 
University property with alcohol service on the days of home football games. 

 


