
The University of Mississippi 

 

Alcohol 

CHA.AM.100.101 
 

 

Summary/Purpose:  To prevent illegal or abusive alcohol consumption. 

 

The University of Mississippi is committed to providing students, employees and visitors a safe, 

supportive and welcoming environment for all academic, cultural, athletic and social events. As 

is true on most college and university campuses, many of the offenses committed against people 

and property at the University are a direct result of Alcohol misuse/abuse. Such behavior 

interferes with the University’s educational mission and shows a lack of respect for one’s self, 

for others within the University community and for the community at large. In furtherance of its 

educational mission, the University has developed policies and educational materials intended to 

combat substance abuse, reduce dangerous drinking and promote responsible behavior regarding 

the consumption of Alcohol. 

 

This policy applies to students, registered student organizations, University faculty and staff, and 

any other person on University property. This policy applies to the conduct of any registered 

student organization in connection with an event sponsored by that organization, whether or not 

the event is on or off campus.  

 

All persons on campus or University property must comply with all applicable law, regulation, 

IHL and University policy regarding the possession, sale, distribution and consumption of 

Alcohol. 

 

 
I. Definitions 
 

The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this policy. 

 

“Beer” is any malt beverage no more than 8% alcohol by weight.1 

 

“Light Wine” is wine no more than 5% alcohol by weight.2 

 

“Alcoholic Beverages” are any alcoholic liquid (excluding “Beer” and 

“Light Wine”) more than (5%) alcohol by weight.3  

 

The term “Alcohol” is used throughout this policy as a collective reference to Beer, Light Wine 

and Alcoholic Beverages. 

 
 

                                                 
1 See Miss. Code. Ann. § 67-3-3 (d). 
2 See Miss. Code. Ann. § 67-3-3 (e). 
3 See Miss. Code Ann. § 67-1-5 (a).  



 2 

II. Illegal Possession, Consumption and Distribution 
 

Underaged drinking is unlawful. No person under 21 is allowed to possess, consume, purchase 

or serve Alcohol on campus or any University property. 

 

No person may buy, sell, serve or otherwise provide Alcohol to anyone under 21.  

 

Alcohol use, even for persons of the legal age limit, is only authorized to the extent that applicable 

law, regulation, IHL or University policy allow. The distribution of Alcohol without a permit is 

unlawful and prohibited. 

 

Lafayette County and the City of Oxford have different Alcohol laws in certain instances. 

Lafayette County is “dry” for Beer and Light Wine, while Oxford is not. This means the 

distribution, possession, and consumption of Beer and Light Wine is illegal in those areas of 

campus located outside the City of Oxford, unless the Mississippi Department of Revenue has 

issued the University a special designation providing otherwise. Please contact the Provost at 

provost@olemiss.edu with any questions on whether a particular area of campus is “dry.” 

 

 

III. False Identification 
 

It is unlawful to provide false information about your name, age or identity to purchase Alcohol. 

The use of another person’s identification, an altered identification, or a “fake ID” to obtain 

Alcohol for yourself or others is prohibited.  

 

 

IV. High Risk or Rapid Consumption 

 

Binge drinking, drinking games, chugging contests and rapid consumption techniques, by their 

nature, promote the abusive use and consumption of Alcohol. These activities, as well as the use of 

funnels, vaporizers, beer bongs or any other device to ingest Alcohol at a rapid pace are prohibited.  

 

 

V. Common Supply 
 

The University prohibits items that allow for the common supply of Alcohol, including kegs, 

pony kegs, party balls, barrels and any other containers used to store large amounts of Alcohol. 

 

 

VI. Alcohol-Related Misconduct 
 

Persons intoxicated, impaired or otherwise under the influence of Alcohol are responsible for their 
conduct, including any damage they may cause to person or property. Disorderly, disruptive or 

unlawful behavior either attendant to or associated with Alcohol use is prohibited. 

 

 

mailto:provost@olemiss.edu


 3 

VII. Public Intoxication 
 

All persons of legal drinking age are required to act and drink responsibly. Public intoxication or 

being impaired or visibly overcome by the consumption of Alcohol is prohibited. 

 

 

VIII. Unattended or Unsecured Alcohol 
 

Alcohol left in plain view or unattended and unsecured is subject to inspection and may be 

confiscated and discarded.  

 

 

IX. Driving Under the Influence 
 

Driving under the influence of Alcohol or driving while intoxicated is unlawful and prohibited. 

 

 

X. Administrative and Academic Buildings  
 

The possession and consumption of Alcohol in administrative and academic buildings is 

prohibited, except and unless served under a lawfully issued permit and in accordance with all 

applicable law, regulation, IHL and University policy. 

 

 

XI. Registered Student Organizations 

 

Registered Student Organizations may not serve or provide a common supply of Alcohol by 

purchasing Alcohol with organizational funds or by facilitating the purchase through any other 

means, including, but not limited to, open bar tabs, the use of personal checking accounts, the 

pooling of funds or giving one or more members a break on organizational dues or expenses.  

 

The presence of any item that provides for the common supply of Alcohol at an event hosted by 

or on the property of a Registered Student Organization may be considered evidence of that 

organization’s common supply. 

 

Multiple violations of this policy by students at an event hosted by or on the property of a 

Registered Student Organization will be presumed to be an alcohol violation by that organization, 

unless the organization demonstrates that it complied in good faith with the requirements of the 

policy regarding Registration of Student Organization Activities (DSA.DS.400.004). 
  



 4 

 

XII. The Sale of Beer and Light Wine at Ole Miss Athletics Facilities 
 

As part of the University’s continuing effort to prevent excessive or binge drinking, the 

University has authorized the sale of Beer and Light Wine at certain SEC athletics events and 

other events and performances held at certain Ole Miss Athletics facilities. These facilities 

include Vaught Hemingway Stadium, the Pavilion and the Oxford-University Stadium at Swayze 

Field. The sale of Beer or Light Wine at any Ole Miss Athletics facility must comply with all 

applicable law, regulation, SEC, IHL and University policy. Although the sale of Beer and Light 

Wine is authorized, the sale of Alcoholic Beverages, as defined under Miss. Code Ann. § 67-1-5 

(a), is prohibited at any Ole Miss athletics event. 

 

A. Prohibited Transactions 
 

No Beer or Light Wine shall be sold, purchased or otherwise provided to an individual below 

the legal drinking age (21). 

 
No Beer or Light Wine shall be sold to an individual visibly overcome by Alcohol, visibly 

intoxicated or reasonably believed to be intoxicated. Any alcohol-impaired or intoxicated 

person(s) may be detained and examined to determine whether medical treatment is 

necessary to ensure their health and safety. 
 

B. Customer Identification 
 

Every individual who purchases Beer or Light Wine must present a valid, government-issued 

ID prior to each transaction. The acceptable forms of identification are a valid driver’s license, 

a government-issued identification card, a U.S. Department of Defense military identification 

card, and a valid passport. Student IDs and University-issued IDs will not be accepted. 

  

C. Point of Sale 

 
Beer or Light Wine may be sold only in certain designated, stationary locations in an Ole 

Miss Athletics facility. Sales are prohibited in the aisles, premium areas, suites, general 

seating areas and student sections of any Ole Miss Athletics facility. 

  
Any Beer or Light Wine offered for sale shall be dispensed in University-issued cups.  

 

No more than two cups of any beverage (either Beer or Light Wine) may be sold to one person 

in one transaction. Any unfinished Beer or Light Wine must be discarded before one exits the 

athletics facility. 

 

The University reserves the right to refuse to sell Beer or Light Wine to any person, at any 

time or place. 

 



 5 

D. “Stop Times” 

 
The SEC has imposed mandatory “stop times” for the sale and distribution of Beer or Light 

Wine during an SEC athletics event or competition held at an Ole Miss Athletics facility. The 

University will enforce the following SEC “stop times” without exception: 

  

Football End of the 3rd Quarter 

Men’s Basketball Second Half 12-Minute TV Timeout 

Women’s Basketball End of the 3rd Quarter 

Baseball End of the top of the 7th inning 

Softball End of the top of the 5th inning 

Other Sports At a designated time, no later than when 75% of 
regulation length competition is scheduled to be 

completed 

 

 

XIII. The Inn at Ole Miss 
 

In accordance with the permits and a license issued by the Mississippi Department of Revenue, the 

Ole Miss Alumni Association offers Alcohol for sale at the Inn at Ole Miss to persons of legal 

drinking age with a valid ID. While the SEC’s requirements for the sale of Beer and Light Wine do 

not apply to the Ole Miss Inn, all sales at the Inn are governed by applicable law and regulation. As 

such, this policy applies to the conduct of any students, registered student organizations, University 

faculty and staff in connection with the sale or consumption of Alcohol at the Ole Miss Inn. 

 

 

XIV. Possible Sanctions, Discipline or Punishment 
 

The conduct prohibited by this policy may be unlawful in certain instances. As such, any person 

who violates this policy risks detainment by the police, arrest, criminal prosecution or civil liability. 

 

In addition to the above punishment, students, registered student organizations and University 

faculty and staff who violate this policy are subject to University sanctions or disciplinary action, 

including suspension, expulsion or termination. See, e.g., Alcohol and Other Drugs Sanctioning 

Policy, DSA.SC.300.025; Game Day and Game Day Activities and Events, DSA.SC.200.095. 

 

As part of its duty to protect the health and safety of all persons on campus, the University reserves 

the right to impose additional penalties on anyone who violates this policy. These penalties include, 

but are not limited to, revoked ticket privileges, restricted or revoked access to University property 

or athletics events. 


