
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Visitors to Animal Research Areas 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Protect personnel, research animals, research equipment, and University 
property. 
 
 
Policy and Procedures 
Visitors to animal laboratories must adhere to all applicable guidelines and regulations set forth 
by the University, the IACUC, the UM Department of Health and Safety, and state and federal 
agencies.  

Definition 
An Animal Area is any room, laboratory, corridor, or building that is designated for animal 
housing, procedures, thoroughfare for animal transport, or any room or laboratory where 
research animals are present. 
 
1. Children and pets are not allowed in Animal Areas. 

2. Visitors must have a professional or University affiliation to enter an Animal Area (e.g., 
potential hires, scientific partners, graduate student candidates, visiting scientists, essential 
maintenance, etc.). Repair personnel from physical plant and preventative maintenance 
personnel (e.g., cagewasher, Edstrom, hoods certification personnel, etc.) must be approved 
and/or accompanied by the person responsible for the project or the area. This requirement is 
waived for government inspectors and other visitors present at the request or as a requirement 
of the University.  

3. Visitors whose purpose is not maintenance or repair are not allowed in the vivarium 
quarantine, feed and bedding, clean and dirty cagewash, clean cage storage, and biohazard 
areas. They may not enter the surgical suite while procedures or surgeries are underway or 
while animals are in recovery. 

4. Visits to the vivarium Animal Areas must be prearranged with the Animal Facility 
Supervisor and visitors must wear a visitor badge.  

5. Vendors and salespersons are allowed only in the vivarium office. 

6. Visitors who will have no direct contact with animals or are only observing animal 
procedures for a short period of time should read the asthma and allergy materials located on 
the Animal Research web site 
(http://www.research.olemiss.edu/iacuc/guidance/safety/allergy) and wear appropriate 
personal protective equipment as a minimum health precaution.  

7. Visitors to Animal Areas who have direct contact with animals or will have extended 
exposure must follow applicable policies and regulations and may be required to satisfy one 
or more of the following:  

a. Notify the Animal Facility Supervisor of exposure to offsite animals (including pets) 
within the previous 48 hours. 

http://www.research.olemiss.edu/iacuc/guidance/safety/allergy


The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

b. Follow health and safety measures, e.g., proper use of personal protective equipment, 
occupational health requirements (submit health forms, read asthma and allergy 
materials, obtain tetanus vaccine as necessary), and medical surveillance tests. 

c. Obtain appropriate training, e.g., species-specific, general and specialized, health and 
safety. Training will be documented and a copy of this documentation will be retained 
by the principal investigator or their designee and the IACUC office. 

d. Comply with Biosafety Policies for research activities conducted in the National 
Center for Natural Products Research located in the Thad Cochran Research Center. 

e. Provide proof that their home institution is PHS assured, that the procedure to be 
conducted has been IACUC-approved and that they are qualified and trained in the 
procedure to be performed and with the species to be used. 


