
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  Private Lender Partner Policy 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies 

and procedures regarding transparency and disclosure in the private 

lender partner selection process. 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

Policy Contents: 

  

14.0   Private Lender Partner Policy Overview 

14.1  Process to Determine Private Lender Partners  

14.2  Private Partner List 

14.3  Lender Review Committee 

   

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 ELM – Electronic Loan Management 

 NDN – National Disbursement Network 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

RFI – “Request for Information” questionnaire used in a competitive selection process 

UM – University of Mississippi 

 

 

 

  

Part 14.0 Private Lender Partner Overview 

In an effort to assist UM students and parents with making informed choices, the OFA 

annually designates certain lenders as “private lender partners” upon completion of a formal 

review process. In fact, our office has been conducting formal lender reviews on an annual 

basis since 1999. 



 

Part 14.1 Process to Determine Private Lender Partners  

The process is comprised of the following steps: 

1) Both lender partners from the past academic year and new lenders requesting to be 

considered as partners for the upcoming academic year must respond to UM’s written Request 

for Information (RFI) by a stated date.  A copy of the most recent questionnaire can be found 

at http://finaid.olemiss.edu/private-lender-partner-policy/.  

2) Upon receipt of all Private Loan RFIs, the UM Lender Review Committee convenes to 

thoroughly discuss each RFI submitted and determine the most competitive lenders based on 

information such as: 

 Commitment to Electronic Loan Management (ELM) 

 Commitment to National Disbursement Network (NDN) 

 Pricing, Fees, and Interest Rate Ranges (as outlined in application solicitation 

disclosures) 

 Repayment Benefits 

 Co-borrower Release Options 

 Degree-Seeking Requirement 

 Satisfactory Academic Progress Requirement 

 Half-Time Status Requirement 

 Prior Balance Options 

 Processing Reliability 

 Quality of Customer Service to Borrowers and staff and UM 

 Past Performance as a Lender Partner, if applicable 

 Financial Stability 

 Long-term Commitment to Fund Loans to UM students 

3) The committee makes final decisions as to which lenders will be named as partners for the 

upcoming academic year.  Updated lender lists are posted on ELM Select, a website that 

offers borrowers a neutral platform for lender comparisons. 

 

Part 14.2 Private Partner List  

The OFA compiles a list of nonaffiliated lenders.  Students and parents are encouraged to 

compare all loan products that best suits their eligibility and needs.  Borrowers may choose 

any lender of their choice and are not required to choose a lender from the Private Lender 

Partner List. 

 Essential Lender List Criteria: 

 Participates in electronic processing through ELM and the NDN. 

 Demonstrates the ability to accurately process all student loans in a timely fashion. 

 Produces a respectable loan approval rate among borrowers at Ole Miss each quarter. 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/private-lender-partner-policy/


 Provides outstanding customer service to borrowers. 

 Provides a primary point of contact within their organization that is accessible to our 

staff in resolving any loan issues for our students. 

 Demonstrates the experience and financial stability to effectively originate and service 

loans. 

 To our knowledge, offers UM borrowers the same or lesser fees & interest rates and 

the same or more advantageous repayment benefits that they offer similar borrowers at 

other schools. 

 

 Part 14.3 Lender Review Committee 

The UM Lender Review Committee must approve any new lender to the Private Lender 

Partner List.  The committee typically consists of the Financial Aid Director, Financial Aid 

Associate Director, Financial Aid Assistant Director for Loan Administration, a Senior 

Financial Aid Advisor, and a Financial Aid Advisor. 

 


