
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Post-Approval Monitoring Program 
 

Summary/Purpose:  To ensure research and teaching activities involving live vertebrate 
animals are conducted in accordance with regulations and are consistent with the IACUC-
approved Animal Study Protocol and amendments. 
 
 
POLICY 
Animal Study Protocols will be subject to post-approval monitoring according to selection 
criteria below.  
 
PROCEDURES 
 
A. Comprehensive site visit 
 
Monitor(s) 
Monitor(s) will be IACUC members or persons designated by the IACUC.  
 
Protocol Selection 
Protocols will be selected for monitoring based on PI history and/or protocol type. For example: 
 

• PIs with past compliance issues, 
• Multiple Survival Surgery (MSS) protocols, 
• Pain category D protocols, 
• Species requiring satellite housing, i.e., field station, 
• Recommendations from Animal Care Staff, and 
• Protocols involving USDA-covered species. 

 
Pre-Review 
 Monitors will review the protocol and amendments using the Post-Approval Monitoring 
Checklist, formulate additional questions, and highlight areas of interest.   
 
Notification of Principal Investigator (PI) 
IACUC staff will notify the PI approximately one month in advance that one or more of their 
protocols will be reviewed. IACUC staff will call the PI or PI’s designee to answer any questions 
and schedule the review. Other protocol research personnel and student assistants should make 
every attempt to participate in the review along with the PI.  
 
Protocol Review 
The protocol review will be conducted in the PI’s office, laboratory or accessible conference 
room using the Post-Approval Monitoring Checklist and protocol records.  
 
Report of Findings 
If necessary, corrective action and timelines will be discussed with the PI at the time of the 
review. A report including findings, recommendations for improvement, action to be taken, 
and/or follow-up procedures (as necessary) will be submitted to the IACUC for review and 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

discussion during a convened IACUC meeting. The Principal Investigator will receive a copy of 
the final report, which will be filed in the corresponding protocol folder(s). 
 
B. Routine animal care staff inspections 
UM’s OLAW assurance and AAALAC accreditation documents state that ORSP animal care 
staff must inspect all animal housing areas.  This affords a continuous opportunity to evaluate the 
research and the animals to detect deviations from approved protocols and amendments.  
Inspections are documented and maintained by the IACUC office. 
 
C. PI Annual Update forms 
The annual update forms are used to verify compliance with approved protocols. 


