
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 

Environmental Leadership Commitment 

The University of Mississippi strives to be a great, comprehensive, public institution of higher 
learning. This institutional ethos includes leadership in environmental stewardship and 
sustainability on our campuses and in the larger communities of which we are a part. The 
University of Mississippi will bring vision, intellect, and high ethical standards to our pursuit of 
environmental leadership in teaching and research, institutional operations, and our relationship 
with the community. 
 
Academics 
The University of Mississippi seeks to nurture excellence in academic scholarship and personal 
character in all that we do.   To better prepare our students to face the challenges of our times 
and to assume leadership roles in the state, nation, and world, we need to equip them with a 
sophisticated understanding of environmental issues.  We are committed to integrating 
environmental scholarship and research into our curriculum, increasing faculty and student 
awareness of environmental issues, and enhancing environmental educational offerings and 
programs of study. 
 
Operations 
The University of Mississippi places high importance on being a good steward of our resources. 
As such, we will comply with applicable environmental laws and go beyond compliance 
whenever possible to set a new standard for environmental stewardship. We will re-examine our 
policies and practices using new benchmarks that reflect our commitment to the principles of 
sustainability and resource conservation.  We will incorporate the consideration of the 
environmental impacts of our operations into our decision-making process. We will engage in 
pollution prevention and minimization activities, measuring results and communicating our 
progress. 
 
Community 
The University of Mississippi is committed to serving the public, through the application and 
dissemination of our research and knowledge. We strive to be a responsible environmental 
citizen in the life of the community.  We will look for opportunities to collaborate with the 
community, the state, and the region because we can achieve more by engaging in partnerships 
than we can achieve by our individual efforts in the pursuit of environmental progress. 
 


