
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Education in Responsible Conduct of Research 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Mandatory educational requirement for sponsored research projects 
personnel to acquire knowledge of best practices in the responsible conduct of research and 
University, State, and Federal regulations. 
 
POLICY 
 
All members of the University of Mississippi strive to exemplify the highest standards of 
integrity and ethical conduct. To support that goal, the University Research Board unanimously 
endorsed mandatory education in the Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR) for all Principal 
Investigators (PIs) and key personnel, including staff, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate and 
undergraduate students, participating in sponsored projects that involve research. Those 
personnel must complete the CITI (Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative) component of 
the RCR curriculum below prior to receipt of sponsored program funding.   
 
Beyond promoting research integrity, the RCR curriculum is designed to help comply with the 
November 2009 National Institutes of Health (NIH) update on its requirement for instruction in 
the responsible conduct of research and the National Science Foundation (NSF) Implementation 
of the America COMPETES Act requirements as well as to meet national ethics education 
norms. 
 
RCR CURRICULUM 
 
CITI Online Education 
The RCR curriculum covers basic principles that are based on best practices of research 
integrity.  It employs the online RCR program at CITI developed by national experts, funded in 
part by the Department of Health and Human Services Office of Research Integrity, and hosted 
by the University of Miami.  Content is modular with brief online tests following each module.  
Completion of all modules takes about 4-6 hours, and CITI notifies the UM Office of Research 
and Sponsored Programs (ORSP) upon completion. 
 
The CITI program provides RCR core modules that address the following discipline categories: 

• Biomedical Sciences 
• Humanities 
• Physical Sciences 
• Social and Behavioral Sciences 

 
The core modules are: 

• Authorship 
• Collaborative Research 
• Conflicts of Interest 
• Data Management 
• Mentoring 
• Peer Review 
• Research Misconduct 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

 
 
For complete information and instructions, see the ORSP RCR Education web page. 
 
Endorsed by University Research Board March 8, 2010.  Approved as policy by Executive 
Management Council April 23, 2010.   
 
 

http://www.research.olemiss.edu/rcr

