
 

The University of Mississippi 

Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 

Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

 

      

 
 

Policy Name:   Students Convicted of Possession or Sale of Drugs 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures regarding student acceptance of financial 

aid awards and their associated terms and conditions. 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.   

 

Policy Contents: 

    

1.0   Drug Conviction Overview 

1.1  Standards for a Qualified Drug Rehabilitation Program 

1.2  Policy Notification 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

SEOG – Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant 

TEACH – Teacher Education Assistance for College and Higher Education Grant 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 

 

Part 1.0 Drug Conviction Overview 

 

A federal or state drug conviction can disqualify students from receiving Federal Title IV 

financial aid.   

 

Title IV aid includes Federal Pell Grant, Iraq & Afghanistan Service Grant, SEOG, 

TEACH, Federal Work-Study, Direct Loans, and PLUS loans. 



When completing a FAFSA, students must indicate whether they have such a conviction.  

If the answer is “Yes”, they may be subject to a period of ineligibility as required by law.  

In addition, students who leave the question blank cannot be paid Federal Title IV aid 

until they correct the FAFSA by providing a response. 

 

The OFA will be notified on a processed FAFSA if a student has reported a conviction.  

Students cannot be awarded unless they are able to confirm that they have regained 

eligibility.  Students may wish to consult with a UM financial aid advisor or use the 

Federal Student Aid’s “Student Aid Eligibility Worksheet” to help determine if this 

law applies to them.  This form is available in both Spanish and English at: 

https://ifap.ed.gov/ifap/byAwardYear.jsp?type=drugworksheets 

 

Convictions only count if they were for an offense that occurred during a period of 

enrollment for which the student was receiving Title IV federal aid – they do not count if 

the offense was not during such a period. Also, a conviction that was reversed, set aside, 

or removed from a student’s record does not count, nor does one received when the 

student was a juvenile, unless the student was tried as an adult. 

 

The chart below illustrates the period of ineligibility for FSA funds, depending on 

whether the conviction was for sale or possession and whether the student had previous 

offenses (Note:  conviction for sale of drugs includes convictions for conspiring to sell 

drugs). 

 

 
 
If a student was convicted of both possessing and selling illegal drugs, and the periods of 

ineligibility are different, the student would be ineligible for the longer period. 

 

The student can regain eligibility the day after the period of ineligibility ends or when the 

student successfully completes a qualified drug rehabilitation program that includes 

passing two unannounced drug tests given by such a program. Any further drug 

convictions will make the student ineligible again. 

 

Any student denied eligibility for an indefinite period can regain it only after one of the 

following ways: 

 

 Successfully completing a rehabilitation program as described below (NOTE:  it 
is the student’s responsibility to certify to the school successful completion). 

https://ifap.ed.gov/ifap/byAwardYear.jsp?type=drugworksheets


 If a conviction is reversed, set aside, or removed from a student’s record so that 
fewer than two convictions for sale or fewer than three convictions for possession 

remain on the record. In such cases, the nature and dates of the remaining 

convictions will determine when the student regains eligibility.  

 Successfully completing two unannounced drug tests which are part of a rehab 
program (the student does not need to complete the rest of the program). 

 

In such cases, the nature and dates of the remaining convictions will determine when they 

regain eligibility.  

 

If a student regains eligibility during a term, the student may receive federal aid for that 

term. 
 

 

Part 1.1 Standards for a Qualified Drug Rehabilitation Program 

 

Standards for a qualified drug rehabilitation program 

 

A qualified drug rehabilitation program must include at least two unannounced drug tests 

and must satisfy at least one of the following requirements: 

 

 Be qualified to receive funds directly or indirectly from a federal, state, or local 
government program. 

 Be qualified to receive payment directly or indirectly from a federally or state-
licensed insurance company. 

 Be administered or recognized by a federal, state, or local government agency or 
court. 

 Be administered or recognized by a federally or state-licensed hospital, health 
clinic, or medical doctor. 

 

Part 1.2 Policy Notification 

 

Email notification will be sent to the student body informing students of this federal 

policy. This email will be sent out during the Fall and Spring Semesters and the 

combined Summer term.  

 


