
The University of Mississippi 
 

Break Time for Nursing Mothers 

Summary/Purpose: In compliance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 

(“PPACA”), which took effect when the PPACA was signed into law on March 23, 2010, the 

University of Mississippi provides reasonable break time for an employee to express breast milk 

as well as provides an appropriate location to express breast milk. 

 

In compliance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (“PPACA”), which took 

effect when the PPACA was signed into law on March 23, 2010, the University of Mississippi 

provides reasonable break time for an employee to express breast milk for her nursing child for 1 

year after the child’s birth. The University also provides an appropriate location, other than a 

bathroom, that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public, to 

express breast milk. The University also recognizes this policy may yield positive business 

results, such as reduced healthcare costs, reduced absenteeism, improved productivity, lower 

turnover, and enhanced University image. 

 

1. Breastfeeding employees shall be allowed a reasonable amount of break time to express milk 
as frequently as needed by the nursing mother. The time allowed will not exceed the normal 

time allowed for lunch and breaks. If additional time is needed (above and beyond normal 

breaks/meal time), the supervisor and employee will agree upon a plan which might include 

the employee using personal leave, coming into work earlier, or leaving later as supervision 

allows. As the University provides compensated breaks, an employee who uses the break 

time to express milk will continue to be compensated during the break time. The lunch 

period is not compensated. 

 

2. A private space (not a bathroom, restroom, or locker room) will be available for an employee 
to breastfeed her child or to express milk using a breast pump. The space may be used for other 

purposes, but will be available for the nursing mothers’ use as needed. The identified space 

must be shielded from view and free from any intrusions from co-workers and the public. Each 

designated space includes a table, a chair, and an electrical outlet. Building mayors are 

responsible for maintaining and listing the designated location, “Lactation Room” on the 

campus map.  The lactation rooms should be listed on the “Services” directory under the 

“Health and Safety” menu. 

 

3. Employees may temporarily store their breast milk on the premises. A refrigerator that is 
normally available for employees’ use will be also for safe storage of breast milk. 

Refrigerators used in laboratories for business purposes are excluded. The nursing mother 

will provide her own containers. Milk stored in the refrigerator will be clearly labeled with 

name and date. If a refrigerator is not available, mothers may bring in a small ice chest for 

storing breast milk. 
 

 

 

Policy Code HRO.BE.600.055. 

Generated on 07/07/2014 at 17:14:13 CDT 

 
Page 1 of 1 

The University of Mississippi Policy Directory 

See http://www.olemiss.edu/policies for full details. 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&amp;policyObjidPara=11290120
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies

