
The University of Mississippi 
Reimbursement of Out-of-Pocket Expenses 

Other than Travel or Group Meals 
 

Summary/Purpose: To establish uniform guidelines and policies for reimbursing 
employees for out-of-pocket expenses. 
 
This policy applies to out-of-pocket expenses such as work-related supplies, other 
commodities, and equipment items such as printers, cameras, monitors and computers 
that support the mission of the university.  Reimbursement for any contractual service 
paid out-of-pocket is strictly prohibited.  This policy does not apply to Travel and Group 
Meal expenses which are covered by other policies.  
 
All out-of-pocket expenses are considered personal purchases until approved by 
appropriate university administration and reimbursed by Procurement Services.  Sales tax 
may not be reimbursed if the items could have been purchased with a university 
procurement card.  Items purchased that are classified as “equipment” must be shipped or 
brought to Central Receiving for inventory tagging.  The unique inventory number 
assigned must be shown on the reimbursement form. 
 
Approvals 
A Request for Payment form must be completed and include appropriate approvals.  Any 
reimbursement request greater than $250 requires the signature/approval of the 
employee’s department head.  If a department head is requesting the reimbursement the 
form must be signed/approved by their appropriate direct report: chair, dean or 
administrative head.  The requirements of this paragraph do not override the requirement 
for all disbursement forms and requests to be signed and approved by a signatory officer 
of the account from which disbursement will be made. 
 
Personal Expenses 
The Procurement Services department will review all out-of-pocket reimbursement 
requests for appropriateness and compliance with university policies.  Procurement 
Services may also ask for additional documentation to demonstrate how the expenditure 
relates to the mission of the department and the university.  The university will not 
reimburse out-of-pocket expenses when there are taxable income issues to the employee 
or the item(s) purchased are not approved by appropriate university administration. 
 
Due to potential tax reporting requirements, employees will not be reimbursed for any 
contractual services paid out-of- pocket.  Contractual services must be paid directly by 
the university to the individual or business and cannot be paid by or reimbursed to an 
employee.  This prohibition includes payments for honorariums, prizes and awards. 
 
General 
The Request for Payment form should include original paid itemized receipts or other 
supporting original documentation.  Original receipts are not returned so departments 
should retain copies.  



Penalty for Fraudulent Claim 
In accordance with the Mississippi Code of 1972, Section 25-3-45, anyone who 
knowingly and willfully violates any provisions of the law is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
The penalty for conviction is loss of job or position held, a fine of not more than $250, 
and civil liability for the full amount of the expenses illegally received, allowed, or 
approved.  The person receiving the reimbursement is also liable whether or not the 
violation was willful.  A university employee should not submit a reimbursement request 
for expenses that were for another university employee. 
 
 


