
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 6 

Health Insurance Coverage for International Students 
 

Summary/Purpose: This policy describes the university health insurance coverage requirement 
for international students and explains the eligibility and process for exemption.  
 
General Policy: 
The University of Mississippi requires that all non-U.S. citizens (=international) students who 
hold a temporary nonimmigrant visa/status and who enroll in academic courses have 
adequate health (medical, accident and medical repatriation/evacuation) insurance coverage. 
Therefore, all non-immigrant international students, with the exception of those holding H1 
status, will be automatically enrolled in the university-negotiated student health insurance 
policy upon their registration for university courses in fall and spring semesters, with the cost of 
such policy subsequently added to the respective student's bursar bill, or remitted via payroll 
deduction in the case of graduate assistants. 
 
International students who hold Permanent Resident, Asylum/Refugee, Deferred Action or 
related status in the USA are not considered to hold “temporary nonimmigrant visa/status” and 
are exempt from the Health Insurance Requirement for International Students.  
 
 
How Health Insurance Costs are Charged: 

• Undergraduate International Students: 
o Non-immigrant international students (with the exception of H1) are 

charged for the cost of health insurance for the term after registering for 
courses for that term (Fall or Spring). Such charges are made through their 
Bursar account. 

• Graduate International Students: 
o Non-Immigrant international students are charged for the cost of health 

insurance for the term after the 10th instructional day once their “graduate 
assistantship status” is assessed. 

• International graduate students who serve as Graduate Assistants 
are charged for the cost of the unsubsidized portion of the health 
insurance through their payroll accounts. 

• International graduate students who do not serve as Graduate 
Assistants are charged through their Bursar account. 

o Note that all Graduate Assistants, regardless of legal status or citizenship, 
are charged for the cost of the unsubsidized portion of the university-
mandated health insurance plan (AETNA) through their payroll accounts 
per the policy of the Graduate School. 

 
Exemptions to the General Policy will be considered on the basis of the conditions listed 
below: 

•    Spouse or parent(s) resides in one of the 50 U.S. states and student’s health is covered 
by the spouse or parent’s medical /health insurance coverage. 

 
•    Participation in a period of approved J-1 Academic Training, F-1 Optional or Curricular  

Practical Training with health insurance plan (including medical evacuation and 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 6 

repatriation) provided by their employer for the entire semester for which exemption is 
sought 

 
•    Completion of course requirements while residing abroad. International non-immigrant 

undergraduate or graduate students who enroll in a study abroad program through the 
University of Mississippi Study Abroad Office must have coverage under the University 
of Mississippi's study abroad insurance policy. 

 
•    International Research Scholars in J-1 status and their J-2 dependents enrolled in 

academic courses who provide proof of health insurance coverage which meets or 
exceeds the insurance coverage requirements of the J Exchange Visitor Program by the 
U.S. Department of State (DOS) Bureau of Education and Cultural Affairs. (Please see 
below for U.S. DOS Insurance Coverage Requirements for J Exchange Visitors). Note: 
The current Mississippi State Employees Health Insurance Plan does not meet the U.S. 
DOS requirements. 

 
•    International non-immigrant employees (not including Graduate Assistants) of the 

University, other than those on J-1, J-2 or H-1 status, enrolled in academic courses, who 
provide proof of enrollment in the (Mississippi) State Employees Health Insurance Plan. 

•    International degree or non-degree seeking non-immigrant students who have health 
insurance coverage  (medical, accident and medical evacuation/repatriation) through the 
sponsorship of an agency which is responsible for their educational expenses, including 
their medical coverage, provided they meet the conditions below, and that, additionally, 
those who hold J status meet or exceed the insurance coverage requirements of the 
Exchange Visitor Program as set by the U.S. Department of State (DOS) Bureau of 
Education and Cultural Affairs.   

o Degree Program Students enrolled at the University who have health 
insurance through the sponsorship of an agency which is responsible for 
their educational expenses and medical coverage, which includes health, 
accident and medical evacuation/repatriation insurance. 

• Requests for exemption from the university contracted student 
health insurance policy as well as supporting documentation must 
be submitted by stated deadlines to the Office of International 
Programs at the University of Mississippi for verification and 
consideration for approval. 

 
o International Exchange/Visiting (non-degree program) Students 

enrolled at the University under an International Exchange Agreement 
between the student’s home institution and the University of Mississippi, 
whose health is insured by an insurance provider which is endorsed by the 
home institution and whose coverage meets or exceeds the J-1 insurance 
requirements of the Exchange Visitor Program by the U.S. Department of 
State. 

• Requests for exemption from the university contracted student 
health insurance policy must be coordinated between the home 
institution and UM’s Study Abroad Office as part of the exchange 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 6 

agreement. Supporting documentation must be submitted by stated 
deadlines well in advance of an exchange/visiting student’s arrival 
on campus. 

 
o Intensive English Program Students who are neither admitted or 

enrolled at the University under the status of Exchange, Degree Seeking, 
or Non Degree Seeking Visitor who have health insurance through the 
sponsorship of an agency which is responsible for their educational 
expenses and medical coverage, which includes health, accident and 
medical evacuation/repatriation insurance. 

• Requests for exemption from the university contracted student 
health insurance policy as well as supporting documentation must 
be submitted by stated deadlines to the Intensive English Program 
at the University of Mississippi Office for verification and 
consideration of approval. The Intensive English Program must 
subsequently submit the exemption requests and  supporting 
documents by stated deadlines to the Office of International 
Programs. The Office of International Programs will adjudicate the 
exemption requests, and notify IEP and make the requisite 
arrangements for approved exemption-requests to go into effect. 
IEP notifies its students in turn. 

 
 

•     Permanent Residents who are enrolled as Graduate Students and who hold a Graduate 
Assistantship may be exempted from the Health Insurance Policy per the processes of 
the Graduate School. 

Request for Exemption Processes 
• Non-Immigrant International Students 

o Requests for an exemption from the university contracted student health 
insurance policy must be made in writing using the Insurance Exemption 
Request and Agreement Form, available at the Office of International 
Programs’ office or website. 

o Exemptions, if approved, will be granted on a term by term basis i.e. Fall 
(generally mid-August to end  of December) and Spring (generally 
January to mid-August). 

o Deadlines for submission of requests for an exemption from the 
contracted student health insurance policy are listed in the table below. 

• Permanent Residents who are enrolled as Graduate Students and who hold a 
Graduate Assistantship must  follow the instructions for exemption as set by the 
Graduate School. 

 
International Student Type 

(Non-Immigrant Only) 

Students must submit Insurance 
Exemption Request and 
Agreement Forms with 

Supporting Documentation to: 

Students must submit 
Exemption Requests 
by stated deadlines: 

Requests must be forwarded by 
Unit to the Office of International 
Programs by stated deadlines*: 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 6 

International Degree 
Program Students 

Office of International Programs 10th day of classes of the 
semester/year for which 
an exemption is being 
requested (fall or spring 
only) 

 

International Exchange / 
Visiting Students (studying 
at UM for only e.g. one 
semester, one year) 

Study Abroad Office 30 days prior to the start 
of semester/year for which 
an exemption is being 
requested. (fall or spring 
only) 

1st day of classes of the 
semester/year for which an 
exemption is being requested 

International Intensive 
English Program Students 
(IEP-Only students, not 
including those who are 
conditionally admitted to a 
degree program or those on 
Exchange/Visiting Student 
status) 

Intensive English Program 5th day of classes of the 
semester/year for which 
an exemption is being 
requested. (fall or spring 
only) 

10th day of classes of the 
semester/year for which an 
exemption is being requested 

International Research 
Scholars in J-status and 
those with J-2 dependent 
status who are enrolled in 
academic courses 

Office of International Programs 10th day of classes of the 
semester/year for which 
an exemption is being 
requested. (fall or spring 
only) 

 

International Employees of 
the University of Mississippi 
enrolled in academic courses 

Office of International Programs 10th day of classes of the 
semester/year for which 
an exemption is being 
requested. (fall or spring 
only) 

 

International undergraduate 
or graduate students who 
enroll in a study abroad 
program through the 
University of Mississippi 
Study Abroad Office 

Office of International Programs 10th day of classes of the 
semester/year for which 
an exemption is being 
requested. (fall or spring 
only) 

 

* Exemptions approved by OIP, go into effect after the 10th instructional day of the semester for which 
the exemption request was submitted. 
 

FOR J-1 SCHOLARS and STUDENTS ONLY 
 

U.S. Department of State’s Insurance Coverage Requirements for Exchange 
Visitors1: 
a) Sponsors shall require each exchange visitor to have insurance in effect which 
covers the exchange visitor for sickness or accident during the period of time that an 
exchange visitor participates in the sponsor's exchange visitor program. Minimum 
coverage shall provide: 

(1) Medical benefits of at least $100,000 per accident or illness; 
(2) Repatriation of remains in the amount of $25,000; 
(3) Expenses associated with the medical evacuation of the exchange visitor to 
his or her home country in the amount of $50,000; and 
(4) A deductible not to exceed $500 per accident or illness. 

(b) An insurance policy secured to fulfill the requirements of this section: 
(1) May require a waiting period for pre-existing conditions which is 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 6 

reasonable as determined by current industry standards; 
(2) May include provision for co-insurance under the terms of which the 
exchange visitor may be required to pay up to 25% of the covered benefits per 
accident or illness; and 
(3) Shall not unreasonably exclude coverage for perils inherent to the activities 
of the exchange program in which the exchange visitor participates. 

(c) Any policy, plan, or contract secured to fill the above requirements must, at a 
minimum, be: 

(1) Underwritten by an insurance corporation having an A.M. Best rating of 
“A–” or above, an Insurance Solvency International, Ltd. (ISI) rating of “A-i” 
or above, a Standard & Poor's Claims-paying Ability rating of “A–” or above, 
a Weiss Research, Inc. rating of B+ or above, or such other rating as the 
Department of State may from  time to time specify; or 
(2) Backed by the full faith and credit of the government of the exchange 

visitor's home country; or 
(3) Part of a health benefits program offered on a group basis to employees or 
enrolled students by a designated sponsor; or 
(4) Offered through or underwritten by a federally qualified Health 
Maintenance Organization (HMO) or eligible Competitive Medical Plan 
(CMP) as determined by the Health Care Financing Administration of the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

(d) Federal, state or local government agencies, state colleges and universities, and 
public community colleges may, if permitted by law, self-insure any or all of the 
above-required insurance coverage. 
(e) At the request of a non-governmental sponsor of an exchange visitor program, and 
upon a showing that such sponsor  has funds readily available and under its control 
sufficient to meet the requirements of this section, the Department of State may 
permit the sponsor to self-insure or to accept full financial responsibility for such 
requirements. 
(f) The Department of State, in its sole discretion, may condition its approval of self-
insurance or the acceptance of full financial responsibility by the non-governmental 
sponsor by requiring such sponsor to secure a payment bond in favor of  the 
Department of State guaranteeing the sponsor's obligations hereunder. 
(g) An accompanying spouse or dependent of an exchange visitor is required to be 
covered by insurance in the amounts set forth in paragraph (a) of this section. 
Sponsors shall inform exchange visitors of this requirement, in writing, in advance of 
the exchange visitor's arrival in the United States. 
(h) An exchange visitor who willfully fails to maintain the insurance coverage set 
forth above while a participant in an exchange visitor program or who makes a 
material misrepresentation to the sponsor concerning such coverage shall be deemed 
to be in violation of these regulations and shall be subject to termination as a 
participant. 
(i) A sponsor shall terminate an exchange visitor's participation in its program if the 
sponsor determines that the exchange visitor or any accompanying spouse or 
dependent willfully fails to remain in compliance with this section. 

 
 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 6 of 6 

 
Sponsors must inform all exchange visitors that they, and any accompanying 
spouse and dependent(s), also may be subject to the requirements of the 
Affordable Care Act in the USA. 

 
 
 

 
1 U.S. Department of State Bureau of Education and Cultural Affairs.  Electronic Code 
of Federal Regulations.   Title 22, Part 62, § 62.14. 

 
 
 
 


	General Policy:
	How Health Insurance Costs are Charged:
	 Undergraduate International Students:
	 Graduate International Students:

	Exemptions to the General Policy will be considered on the basis of the conditions listed below:
	Request for Exemption Processes
	FOR J-1 SCHOLARS and STUDENTS ONLY
	Sponsors must inform all exchange visitors that they, and any accompanying spouse and dependent(s), also may be subject to the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in the USA.

