
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Bake Sales at the Student Union 
 

Summary/Purpose:  This policy is for bake sales conducted on campus by the Ole Miss Student 

Union. 

 

To ensure that bake sales conducted by the Student Union are in accordance with established 

policies and procedures, the Ole Miss Student Union retains the authorization to supervise bake 

sales in front of both Weir Hall and the Lott Leadership Institute on Galtney Lott Plaza. 

 

The following is the policy for bake sales reserved by the Ole Miss Student Union:   

 

1. Bake sales must have prepared baked goods that are sold to the general public and are 

allowed by the Student Union pending completion and approval of the reservation form.   

 

2. Only registered student organizations and University departments or organizations may 

conduct bake sales on campus in the designated locations.  Off-campus organizations are 

prohibited from conducting bake sales on campus. 

 

3. Bake sales are restricted to the preset locations in front of both Weir Hall and the Lott 

Leadership Institute on Galtney Lott Plaza between the hours of 10:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Due 

to fire code and building regulations, tables may not be moved from assigned spaces. 

 

4.    Organizations and departments may only have three (3) bake sales per semester or full 

summer term. 

 

5. Items that are not allowed to be sold: pre-purchased food or drinks (doughnuts, candy, 

pizza, items from a bakery, etc.), and Girl Scout cookies. The Ole Miss Student Union 

reserves the right to permit/not permit all sales. 

 

6.     All items must be individually wrapped. 

 

7. The area must be left in a clean condition at the conclusion of each day of the bake sale.  

Failure to do so will result in immediate loss of privileges for the remainder of the academic 

year. 

 

8. Bake sales are limited to two (2) consecutive days.  Special circumstances will be 

considered on an individual basis. 

 

9. No more than one (1) bake sale will be permitted per day. 

 

10.   Due to location, absolutely no music or amplified sound is permitted at any time. 

 

11. No liability will be assumed by the University or the Ole Miss Student Union for any food 

that is sold by the sponsoring organization. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

12.  Fronting is prohibited. Fronting is when an individual or organization uses university 

space/facilities and services under the guise that the activity is a university-sponsored 

program. Violator’s will have their reservation privileges revoked. 

13. The Director of the Ole Miss Student Union has the authority to further limit the number 

of or all additional bake sales by an individual student group or campus department. 

 

14. Interpretation of the regulations and their adjustment to special circumstances shall be the 

prerogative of the Ole Miss Student Union. 

 

15. In the event that the university suspends campus activities or closes, the table reservation 

will be cancelled, and the user will have the opportunity to reschedule.  

 

16.  Failure to abide by these guidelines will result in loss of privileges. 


