
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Energy Management Policy 
 

Summary/Purpose:  The objective of Facilities Management energy management efforts is to 

provide reliable and cost-effective energy services to the campus in support of its mission of 

teaching, research, and public service.  Our systems provide utility services to over 6 million 

square feet of facilities, which include numerous research facilities, laboratories, health facilities, 

academic buildings, residential halls, dining facilities, athletic facilities, computing centers and 

administrative buildings. 

 

Faced with rising utility costs, increasing demands on university infrastructure and budget 

constraints it is necessary that a proactive energy program be adopted in order to ease budgetary 

pressures through providing a means to reduce campus energy demands.  Listed below is a list of 

energy policies that will help meet that goal.  All employees are asked to familiarize themselves 

with these items and provide support and cooperation in achieving a reduction in campus energy 

use. 

 

1. Facilities Management will manage building temperatures to control energy 
usage.  Temperatures will be maintained at 68ºF during the heating season and 
74ºF during the cooling season (+/-2ºF).  Building occupants should dress 
appropriately for the season to minimize the need for additional heating or 
cooling. 
 

The following areas will be exempt from these energy set points: 

 Animal care facilities where temperature changes may adversely affect 
animals. 

 Laboratory facilities where temperature controls may affect ongoing 
research and areas pre-designated for temperature control. 

 Computer server sites. 

 Facilities that house art collections, musical instruments and archival 
areas that require temperature control. 

 

During unoccupied times, building heating and air conditioning equipment may be shut 

down and the temperature allowed to drift within 55º (winter) and 85º (summer). 

 

2. Electric heaters are not to be used except where specifically required by 
occupants due to medical conditions, failure of building heating or cooling 
systems or when the heating and cooling systems cannot be adjusted to maintain 
adequate space conditions (68º winter/74º summer). 

 

3. Domestic or potable hot water temperatures on campus will be set to 115ºF.  
Building occupants should also attempt to limit the use of hot water in order to 
conserve energy and reduce costs. 
 

4. Where possible, Facilities Management will replace incandescent type lighting 
with high efficiency lighting (ex:  fluorescent tube, compact fluorescent or LED 
bulbs and fixtures).  Certain exceptions will exist such as theatre lighting, lighting 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

associated with dimming systems or in areas where incandescent lighting meets 
specified criteria. 
 

5. Automated or sensor activated lighting controls will be installed where possible 
and practical. 
 

6. The use of day lighting is recommended whenever possible.  The incorporation 
of natural lighting into offices and classrooms through windows and turning off 
electrical lighting will also reduce costs. 
 

7. Whenever possible all office equipment should be shut off at night and when 
offices are not in use.  This includes window air conditioners and appliances not 
in use.  Power management features on computers such as hibernation or sleep 
modes should be enabled. 
 

8. Avoid opening or leaving building windows open.  Nearly all campus facilities 
have filtered systems to supply fresh air requirements in the buildings.  Keeping 
windows closed helps the systems to maintain a clean and conditioned air supply 
in the building and to operate more efficiently. 
 

9. Take stairs instead of elevators and walk rather than drive when possible and 
practical. 
 

10. Facilities Management will review any suggestions submitted from persons on 
campus that assist us in saving energy.  Please forward your ideas to 
fm@olemiss.edu and join us in the effort to reduce the cost of energy use 
campus wide. 

 

 

mailto:fm@olemiss.edu

