
 The University of Mississippi  

Freshman Admission 
 
Standard Test Results • Please note that standard test results (ACT or SAT) should be sent 
directly from the testing service to the admissions office. 
 
College Preparatory Curriculum • Admission of entering freshmen is based on the completion 
of the College Preparatory Curriculum (CPC) specified below with either a specific minimum 
grade-point average (GPA) or both a specific GPA and minimum standard test score. Students 
must submit a high school transcript reflecting satisfactory completion of the following high 
school course requirements as well as an official graduation date. (Provisional admission may be 
granted after six semesters of high school provided the transcript indicates that courses to 
complete the CPC are underway; final admission will require a complete transcript.) 
Carnegie 
Subject Units Contents and Remark 
English 4 All must require substantial communication skills components (i.e., 

reading, writing, listening, and speaking) 
Mathematics 3 Includes Algebra I, Geometry, Algebra II. A fourth class in higher-

level mathematics is highly recommended. 
Science 3 Choice of biology, advanced biology, chemistry, advanced 

chemistry, physics, advanced physics, or any other science course 
with comparable rigor and content. One Carnegie unit from a 
rigorous physical science course with content at a level that may 
serve as introduction to physics and chemistry may be used. Two of 
the courses chosen must be laboratory based. 

Social Studies 3 Courses should include U.S. history (1 unit), world history (1 unit 
with substantial geography component), government (1/2 unit), and 
economics (1/2 unit) or geography (1/2 unit). 

Advanced electives 2 Requirements may be met by earning 2 Carnegie units from the 
following areas/courses, one unit of which must be in a foreign 
language or world geography. 

  Foreign language 
  World geography 
  4th year lab-based science 
  4th year mathematics 
Computer Applications 1/2 Course should emphasize the computer as a productivity 

tool. Instruction should include the use of application packages, 
such as word processing and spreadsheets. The course also should 
include basic computer terminology and hardware operation. 

Eighth Grade UnitsAlgebra I or first-year foreign language taken in the eighth grade will be 
accepted for admission provided the course content is the same as 
the high school course. 

 
Admission of Mississippi Residents • Regular admission will be granted to the following: 

Page 1 of 4 
 



 The University of Mississippi  

(1) Students completing the College Preparatory Curriculum (CPC) with a minimum 3.20 high 
school GPA on the CPC. 

(2) Students completing the CPC with a minimum 2.50 high school GPA on the CPC and a 
minimum score of 16 on the composite ACT (or 770 on the SAT). 

(3) Students completing the CPC with a class rank in the top 50 percent and a minimum score of 
16 on the composite ACT (or 770 on the SAT). 

(4) Students completing the CPC with a minimum 2.00 high school GPA on the CPC and a 
minimum composite score of 18 on the ACT (or 860 on the SAT). 

(5) Students who meet full-qualifier certification requirements for the National Collegiate 
Athletic Association (NCAA). 

Nonresident Admissions 

IHL Board policy regarding the admission of nonresident students was changed effective for 
students applying for summer or fall of 2012 or a subsequent term. The following policy was 
approved at the March 2011 board meeting: 

Any student identified as a nonresident will be qualified for admission to a Mississippi institution 
of higher learning based on equivalent preparation as determined by the admitting institution.  

If, however, an admitting institution determines that anticipated enrollment will exceed the 
institution’s capacity to adequately serve all prospective students who are otherwise qualified for 
admission, then the institution may make appropriate admissions decisions from among the pool 
of otherwise qualified nonresident applicants in light of institutional capacity and consistent with 
constitutional and other legal requirements, as well as in light of the IHL and the admitting 
institution’s values, mission, and goals.  

Specific admissions criteria for nonresident students can be found at the following website: 
www.olemiss.edu/admissions or by contacting the Office of Admissions. 

 
Admission Requirements for the Professional Program in Pharmacy and Early Entry 
Nursing • Freshman admission requirements for the professional program in pharmacy and early 
entry nursing differ from general admission requirements. Please see the pharmacy and health 
professions sections of the catalog for details. 
 

Minimum Test Scores • Students whose ACT subtest score in reading and/or English is less than 
17 (or SAT verbal score is 400 or less) are required to enroll in an appropriate developmental 
course during the first semester of enrollment and to remain in the course until receiving a passing 
grade or until passing the placement exam administered by the Department of Developmental 
Studies. Additionally, students whose ACT subtest score in mathematics is less than 19 (or SAT 
mathematics score is 450 or less) are required to enroll in an appropriate developmental course 
during the first semester of enrollment and to remain in the course until receiving a passing grade 
or until passing the placement exam administered by the Department of Developmental 
Studies. Students with ACT subtest scores of 17, 18, or 19 are encouraged to enroll in 

Page 2 of 4 
 

http://www.olemiss.edu/admissions


 The University of Mississippi  

developmental courses. Those students who enroll in two or more developmental courses also are 
required to complete two semesters of Developmental Support Lab (see below). Enrollment in 
developmental courses is limited to students with subtest scores below 20 except with permission 
of the department. Developmental courses completed at other postsecondary institutions before 
enrolling at The University of Mississippi may be considered to meet developmental requirements. 

Test Score Minimums as Course Prerequisites • Some courses may require a minimum standard 
test score as a prerequisite. For example, students enrolling in Biology 160/161 must have a 22 
subscore on the mathematics portion of the ACT (SAT math score of 510) or have completed 
College Algebra with a grade of B or higher. Students enrolling in Chemistry 105/106 must have 
one of the following: a 23 subscore on the mathematics portion of the ACT (SAT score of 590); 
completed Chemistry 101 with a grade of C or higher; completed Math 125 (Basic Mathematics 
for Science and Engineering) with a grade of B or higher. 
 
Other Admission Criteria • Residents of Mississippi who apply and do not meet the admission 
requirements stated above may enter the Comprehensive Academic Screening Program 
(counseling and testing) held on campus and at other designated locations prior to the beginning 
of the first summer session. Such counseling will consider student interests, special skills, 
experiences, and other noncognitive factors. After counseling, students will take a computer-
based examination, Accuplacer, to assist the university in the admission decision. Students who 
pass the Accuplacer will be admitted for the fall term and will be encouraged to participate in the 
Developmental Support Lab during the first two semesters of enrollment.  
 
Summer Developmental Program • Mississippi residents who are not successful on the 
Accuplacer examination may be admitted to the Summer Developmental Program. This intensive 
program concentrates on those high school subject areas (writing, reading, mathematics) that are 
crucial to success in first-year college courses. Students who successfully exit the summer 
program may continue in the fall term with the requirement of participation in the 
Developmental Support Lab during the fall and spring semesters. Students who do not pass the 
Summer Developmental Program are counseled to explore other postsecondary options, 
including those offered by two-year colleges that prepare students for transfer into bachelor’s 
degree programs. 
 
The Developmental Support Lab is designed to assist students with first-year college studies. The 
goal of this lab is to provide individualized support in intermediate and regular academic courses 
for marginally prepared students. 
 
Early Admission • A superior secondary school student may be offered Early Admission at the 
end of the third year in high school if the following criteria are met: 
At least a 3.5 GPA on all CPC courses completed, a minimum composite ACT score of 25 (or 
SAT 1130), and recommendation by the applicant’s high school principal or counselor.  
 
Earning College Credit in High School • In the summer before the senior year in high school, 
students may earn university credit by attending enrichment programs such as PACE (Promoting 
Academic and Creative Excellence), Croft Summer Scholars, and the Summer Institutes in Art, 
Journalism, and in Music.  

Page 3 of 4 
 



 The University of Mississippi  

 
Students must have completed a minimum of 14 high school units with a minimum 2.5 GPA on a 
4.0 scale, or better on all high school courses, as documented by an official high school 
transcript; home-schooled students must submit a transcript prepared by a parent, guardian, or 
custodian with a signed, sworn affidavit to meet the requirement.  Students must have an 
unconditional written recommendation from their high school principal and/or guidance 
counselor.  A home-schooled student must submit a parent, legal guardian or custodian’s written 
recommendation to meet the requirement. Students may be considered for the dual enrollment 
program who have not completed the minimum 14 core high school units if they have a 
minimum ACT composite score of thirty (30) or the equivalent SAT score, and have the required 
grade-point average and recommendations outlined above.   
 
Summer enrichment programs are administered by the Office of Summer School. 
 

Page 4 of 4 
 


