
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 2 
 

Class Attendance Guidelines 

The following statements elaborate upon the University of Mississippi’s general attendance policy state in 

the Catalog and apply to courses that are delivered in the traditional instructional mode.  This policy is 

based on the position that students who attend class learn more than those who do not attend regularly and 

that grades are a reflection of learning.  Furthermore, this policy affirms that faculty and students share 

important responsibilities for the quality of the overall in-class learning experience.   

Responsibilities of Instructors  

It is the responsibility of the instructor to determine the attendance guidelines that best promote learning 

in a particular course.  The instructor is expected to articulate and inform students in writing via a course 

syllabus, on or before the first meeting of each course, about specific class attendance requirements.  

The following list gives procedural information and suggested practices for constructing course 

attendance policies. 

1. Better class attendance policies distinguish between anticipated and unanticipated absences.  
Anticipated absences might be associated with civic responsibilities (e.g., jury duty or military 

service); official University competitions, performances, or travel; religious observations; or 

certain scheduled medical procedures.  Unanticipated absences might occur due to inclement 

weather, accidents, illnesses besetting the student or immediate family members, or death of a 

family member or close friend. 

2. Better class attendance policies describe under what conditions and the way in which 
accommodations will be made for missed major exams and assessments by offering replacement 

activities.  An accommodation may involve making up, in a timely manner, missed assignments 

or tests/quizzes.  In some courses, however, the learning missed cannot be approximated through 

replacement activities and instructors will use their academic judgment in determining whether to 

provide an accommodation. 

3. Better class attendance policies will recognize that students may have legal, civic, or military 
duties external to the university.  Students often have no control over these duties and may be 

legally compelled to miss classes.  Students should not be penalized for these absences. 

4. Better class attendance policies allow students to request an accommodation associated with 

observation of a recognized religious day.  A list of recognized religious days is maintained by 

the Dean of Students Office. 

5. Better class attendance policies usually do not include excessive course grade penalties that are 

based on a number of absences.  If, however, the instructor articulates in the syllabus the role of 

daily class participation in the learning process, reasonable grade deductions can be made for 

absences.  

6. Better class attendance practices recognize that some students represent the university in a variety 

of ways and that this can lead to conflicts with scheduled classes.   

7. Schools or the College may establish more restrictive absence guidelines, provided that students 

are adequately informed about such guidelines.  

Responsibilities of Students 

It is the responsibility of the student to comply with the class attendance guidelines/policies and complete 

assignments, including those that involve out-of-class or online participation.  Students are responsible for 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 2 
 

informing instructors in advance about anticipated absences.  Students should recognize that individual 

sections of a course may be taught differently and that the attendance policy for individual sections of a 

course may not be the same. 

Aside from the learning opportunities missed due to absences from class, there are cases when a class 

absence or multiple absences may result in a student being dropped from a course or dismissed from the 

University.  Specifically,  

1. Students must attend the first meeting of every course for which they are registered, unless they 
obtain prior departmental approval. Without such approval, a student who is absent from the first 

class meeting may be dropped from that class by the dean of the school or college with the 

responsibility for the course.  

2. A student who incurs excessive absences in a given course may receive a grade of F for the 
course, and, in addition, may be dismissed from the class upon recommendation of the instructor 

and approval by the student’s academic dean. When it appears to an instructor that a student has 

discontinued a class without officially dropping the course, the instructor will report this fact to 

the student’s academic dean. The university reserves the right to dismiss from the university any 

student who has been excessively absent from multiple courses. 

 

Faculty and staff who supervise student organizations and teams, including NCAA sports teams, are 

expected to schedule competitions and performances in such a way as to minimize the number of classes 

that students will miss. Names of participating students and the dates of class conflicts should be provided 

to the students’ instructors prior to participation.  Students and instructors should attempt to resolve 

potential conflicts regarding class attendance before the semester course withdrawal deadline.  In cases 

where absence from class results from travel delays or the unanticipated continuation of participation in a 

competition, the student or supervisor should inform the instructor within one business day so that 

reasonable accommodations for absences due to university-sponsored activities can be made.  

If a student informs an instructor in advance about an anticipated absence and the instructor decides not to 

provide an accommodation for a major exam or assessment, the student may appeal to the department 

chair or program director (or dean, when the instructor is chair or program director) who oversees the 

course.  An appeal must be based on (a) failure of the instructor to articulate a policy, (b) failure of the 

instructor to follow the articulated policy, or (c) failure by the instructor to offer a reasonable 

accommodation for a documented absence that caused a student to miss an assessment that is worth 20% 

or more of the course grade.   

 


