
English Language Proficiency Appeal Process 
 

The following process is set forth to allow departments/units to request admission consideration 

for undergraduate degree seeking international students who have met all admission 

requirements except the English Language Proficiency. 

 

 Undergraduate full admission requires:  
o TOEFL-IBT score of 79 or higher or 
o IELTS overall band score of 6.00 or higher or 
o PTE-A score of 53 or higher 

 Undergraduate full admission with Intensive English (IE) 090/091 required is granted 
if: 

o TOEFL-IBT score is 69-78 or 
o IELTS score is 5.5 or 
o PTE-A is 47-52   
Students with F visas cannot be issued an I-20 for this category of admission 

 Intensive English Program (IEP) only admission is given for scores: 
o TOEFL-IBT below 69  
o IELTS below 5.5 
o PTE-A below 47 

 A department or unit may request a formal review of an IEP only admission status for 
scores of 61-68 on the TOEFL-IBT with no sub-score below 15, 4.50 or higher on 

IELTS, and 41 or higher on PTE-A by submitting a written request to the Admissions 

Coordinator in the Office of International Programs. 

 Through the appeal process, an IEP only admit may be elevated to full admission with 
IE 090/091 required. There is no appeal process to achieve full admission without IE 090 

and IE 091. 

 To initiate an appeal, the following steps must be followed: 
o The department/unit requesting the appeal must submit a letter of appeal to the 

Admissions Coordinator in the Office of International Programs. The letter must 

clearly define the reason(s) for requesting the appeal and a plan of academic 

support demonstrating the commitment of the department to the academic success 

of the student. Without this plan, an appeal will not be considered. 

o Upon approval of the written letter of appeal, the student will be contacted and 
arrangements will be made for the student to take a proficiency test administered 

by the IEP. This test will be administered in compliance with the testing protocol 

and a grade of 40 or higher is required for a successful appeal. 

 If the student successfully passes the proficiency test, the admission status of the student 
will be changed from IEP only to full admission with IE 090/091 required. 

 An appeal on behalf of an individual student will be considered only once at the 
University of Mississippi. If the appeal is not granted, the student’s admission will be to 

IEP only. 

 


