
ADMISSION OF INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 
The University of Mississippi welcomes the enrollment of qualified international students. Any 
applicant who does not hold U.S. citizenship, regardless of where he or she resides, is 
considered “international” and must check “international student” on his or her online 
application. 
 
International students fall into the following categories: 
Degree-seeking students: Applicants intending to enroll in an academic degree program, 
applying for “conditional admission,” or intending to take courses in preparation for a graduate 
degree program or for personal enrichment. 
 
Exchange students, incoming study abroad students, visiting students, etc.,:  See 
http://studyabroad.olemiss.edu/?go=incoming for information on requirements for admission 
as a non-degree-seeking student. 
 
Intensive English Language (IEP) students: For information on requirements for admission as an 
English language learner visit this link: https://iep.olemiss.edu/how-to-apply/  
 
Summer College for High School Students Eligibility and Enrollment through the Office of 
Outreach: 
http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/schs/international_students.html 
 
Accelerator Program students: Applicants who do not initially meet the English language 
proficiency minimum score and/or the minimum grade-point-average may enroll in an 
undergraduate accelerator program.  See <insert OMI link> for more information. 
 
Application Forms, Fees, and Deadlines 
International students interested in undergraduate admission must apply online at 
http://www.international.olemiss.edu/apply.html. A nonrefundable application fee of $60 
(subject to change) must accompany the online application. Applications submitted without this 
fee will not be processed. International applicants are strongly encouraged to apply for 
admission no later than six months prior to their desired enrollment term. Priority application 
deadlines are April 1 for fall term admission and October 1 for spring term admission, but 
admissions are on a rolling basis.  (Fall term begins in mid-August; spring term begins in mid-
January.) 
 
Requirements and Criteria for International Admission 
The documents required to accompany the online form and application fee, and the criteria for 
admission to a degree program, depend on the applicant’s classification and on where he/she 
has received his/her previous education. 
 
Classification 

http://studyabroad.olemiss.edu/?go=incoming
https://iep.olemiss.edu/how-to-apply/
http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/schs/international_students.html
http://www.international.olemiss.edu/apply.html


International Freshman: An international applicant who has completed the equivalent of 12 
years or more of elementary and secondary schooling based on his/her country’s educational 
system and who has never attended a college or university. 
International Transfer: An international applicant who has already completed course work at 
the higher education level (college or university), including a person who holds a bachelor’s 
degree or its equivalent from an accredited college or university and who is interested in taking 
additional undergraduate course work. 
 
Location of Prior Education: 
Abroad: The secondary school from which the freshman applicant graduated, or the college or 
university from which the transfer applicant is transferring, is outside the U.S.  
 
U.S.-outside Mississippi: The high school from which the freshman applicant has graduated, or 
the college or university from which the transfer applicant is transferring, is located within the 
U.S. but outside the state of Mississippi.  
 
Mississippi: The high school from which the freshman applicant has graduated, or the college or 
university from which the transfer applicant is transferring, is located within the state of 
Mississippi. 
 
International Freshman/Transfer applicants graduating from a secondary school or transferring 
from a college or university abroad must provide the following items and meet the following 
criteria. Submit in hard-copy format to the Office of International Programs or to Ole Miss 
International electronically the following items: 

1. Official or officially certified transcripts and degree certificates. 
o Freshman: 

 Official English language transcripts from secondary school(s) attended; 
degree certificate if already graduated 

 Evidence of college preparatory curriculum, achieving a minimum 3.00 
cumulative high school grade-point-average on a 4.00 scale (or its 
equivalent) 

o Transfer: 
 Official English language transcripts from all colleges and universities 

attended; degree certificate if already graduated 
 Minimum 2.50 cumulative college or university grade-point-average on a 

4.00 scale (or its equivalent) 
 Students who have completed less than 30 credits (or the equivalent of one 

year of full-time enrollment) at a college or university: Official English 
language transcripts and degree certificates from secondary school(s)  

2. Copy of passport identification pages, if available, to help ensure accuracy of name 
and birth date 

3. Affidavit of Financial Support if intending to hold F-1 or J-1 visa status.  Although not 
required for admission, submitting the affidavit with other application materials 
expedites the admissions/enrollment process. 

https://international.olemiss.edu/affidavit-of-financial-support/


4. English proficiency test score.  Please see the English Proficiency requirements here: 
<link to EPR_Table.docx> 

 
Students applying to the Accelerator Program must apply here: <OMI application link>. 
 
International Freshman/Transfer applicants graduating from a secondary school or transferring 
from a college or university in the U.S., whether in Mississippi or elsewhere, must meet the 
admissions requirements as listed in the section titled Admission of Freshman and Transfer 
Students in this catalog. Additionally, they must provide: 

1. Copy of passport identification pages, if available, to help ensure accuracy of name 
and birth date 

2. Affidavit of Financial Support if intending to hold F-1 or J-1 visa status.  Although not 
required for admission, submitting the affidavit with other application materials 
expedites the admissions/enrollment process. 

3. English proficiency test score.  Please see the English Proficiency requirements here: 
<link to EPR_Table.docx> 

4. Copy of their U.S. visa or I-94 form (H4, L2, etc.), permanent resident card, or other 
documentation related to one’s status in the U.S. 

 
Pre-Professional Programs 
Undergraduate international applicants may be admitted to pre-professional programs. But 
admission to a pre-professional program does not guarantee admission to the corresponding 
professional program. Admission to professional programs, to which Mississippi residents have 
priority consideration, is generally determined after students have completed a set of core 
courses as determined by the program. Undergraduate international students are not eligible 
for admission to the schools of Medicine, Nursing, and Dentistry. 
 
English Language Proficiency Requirements for Admission to the University 
Please see the undergraduate English Language Proficiency table at this page <link to 
EPR_Table.docx>. 
 
Estimated Costs 
The estimated minimum cost of attending the University of Mississippi for each 12-month 
period may be found at https://international.olemiss.edu/cost-of-study/. Costs include tuition 
(including base tuition and nonresident fees), the international student service fee, anticipated 
health insurance costs, and the estimated costs for housing, meals, and books. 
 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services requires international applicants who intend to hold 
F-1 or J-1 status to provide evidence of solvency to meet the estimated costs (as set by the 
university) of at least the first year of study prior to the issuance of Form I-20 (Certificate of 
Eligibility for Non-Immigrant [F-1] Student Status for Academic and Language Study) or Form 
DS-2019 (Certificate of Eligibility for Exchange Visitor [J-1] Status). Evidence of solvency must be 
provided as part of the Affidavit of Financial Support. 
 

https://international.olemiss.edu/affidavit-of-financial-support/
https://international.olemiss.edu/cost-of-study/
https://international.olemiss.edu/affidavit-of-financial-support/


International Student Scholarships 
Please contact the Office of International Programs for information on scholarships for 
international undergraduate students, or see 
http://www.international.olemiss.edu/finaidcurrent.html. 
 
Health Insurance for International Students 
The University of Mississippi requires all international students who hold a temporary 
nonimmigrant status and who enroll in academic courses to have adequate health insurance 
coverage. Therefore, all international students, with the exception of those with H-1 status, will 
be automatically enrolled in the university-contracted student health insurance policy upon 
their registration for university courses for fall and spring semesters, with the cost of such 
policy subsequently added to each student’s bursar bill. The policy includes health/medical 
insurance coverage as well as medical evacuation and repatriation of remains in the event of a 
medical emergency or death. Exemptions to the health insurance policy will be considered on 
the basis of pre-stated conditions on a case-by-case basis. For further information, please 
contact the Office of International Programs, or see https://international.olemiss.edu/health-
care-and-insurance/. 
 
Office of International Programs 
P.O. Box 1848 
331 Martindale 
University, MS  38677 
 
 
 
 

http://www.international.olemiss.edu/finaidcurrent.html
https://international.olemiss.edu/health-care-and-insurance/
https://international.olemiss.edu/health-care-and-insurance/

