
The University of Mississippi 
 

Transfer or Reemployment of Employees  

Affected by a Reduction in Force 

Summary/purpose:   The purpose of this policy is to assure that staff employees whose 

employment status/hours may or will be adversely affected by a Reduction in Force (RIF) are 

duly given consideration for job vacancies.  Departments may consider affected employees prior 

to considering other unaffected internal or external applicants through a full recruitment search.  

This policy applies to all permanent full-time and part-time administrative, professional and 

other staff employees of The University of Mississippi who meet the eligibility criteria below.  

The affected personnel may be active (eligible for a transfer) or inactive (eligible for 

reemployment) and by purpose of this policy will be referred to as the “employee.” 

From time to time, some areas or departments with the University may experience workload 

reductions resulting from reorganization, economic change, or other factors.  When this occurs, 

there is a need to provide an affected employee with a mechanism for placement into meaningful 

employment in another area of the University, provided the employee meets the minimum 

qualifications of a position. 

Eligibility 

In order to be eligible for the internal recruitment process and assistance, the employee must 

meet the following eligibility requirements: 

1. The employee has been notified that he/she will be affected by a reduction in force. 

2. The employee must have held a position designated as “Staff.”  

3. The employee must have maintained at least an overall "satisfactory" rating on his/her 

performance appraisal over the last twelve months.  If the employee has not received a 

performance appraisal in the last twelve months from his/her supervisor, the employee 

will automatically meet this eligibility requirement. 

4. The employee must not have any documented written warnings issued in the last calendar 

year. 

5. The employee must not have any reported complaints and/or issues resulting in adverse 

findings with the Department of Equal Opportunity and Regulatory Compliance within 

the last five calendar years. 

Procedures 

This policy and program will be administered as outlined below: 

1. Upon receiving notification, the employee may contact the Associate Director of Human 

Resources to express an interest in participating in the program that includes a 

preferential transfer/reemployment listing or “pool of applicants” for employees affected 

by a reduction in force. 



The University of Mississippi 
 

2. The Associate Director of Human Resources will provide instructions for submitting the 

application materials. 

3. The application will include supplemental questions regarding areas of interest, skills, 

and qualifications.  The staff member will have the opportunity to upload a resume, cover 

letter, and reference letters.  It is strongly recommended that if the staff member does not 

have an updated CV/resume, that he/she seek assistance from the University Career 

Center.  This assistance is available by appointment and is free-of-charge. 

4. When a personnel requisition is received by the Department of Human Resources, an 

employment representative will review the list of affected employees.  If there is at least 

one applicant that meets the minimum qualifications listed on the personnel requisition, 

the employment representative will provide the application materials to the hiring 

manager.   

5. After review of the applicant materials provided, the department may interview and select 

an affected employee without including the position on the University’s jobs website and 

advertising the position externally.   

6. Wage and salary considerations for this transfer or reemployment will be consistent with 

the “Policy and Procedure Manual for The Variable Compensation Plan.” 

7. Once an employee has accepted the transfer or reemployment, he/she may reapply for the 

previous position, should it later become vacant.  The employee is not required to wait 

six (6) months to transfer or return to a previously held position. 

8. An affected employee may refuse consideration for a position and still be eligible to 

participate in the program. 

9. Employees affected by a RIF will maintain these transfer or re-employment opportunities 

for the later of six (6) months after the announcement of their impending RIF or three (3) 

months after termination.   

 

The University of Mississippi is an EEO/AA/Title VI/Title IX/Section 504/ADA/ADEA 

employer.   

Questions regarding this policy may be directed to the Associate Director of Human Resources  

or the Executive Director of Equal Opportunity and Regulatory Compliance. 

Notes: This policy does not replace the “Reduction in Force of Staff Personnel” policy. 

Additionally, this policy does not guaranteed placement of the affected employees.   

 

Related Policy: Reduction in Force of Staff Personnel 

 Equal Employment and Affirmative Action 

 


