
Credentialing for InCommon 
 
Summary/Purpose: This policy describes the means by which user accounts and credentials are 
managed by the University of Mississippi, as related to participation in the InCommon 
Federation, for the purpose of demonstrating participant trustworthiness.   This policy is intended 
to satisfy the InCommon Federation requirements related to publication of Participant 
Operational Practices. 

 
InCommon Federation: Background and Expectations 

 
Participation in the InCommon Federation (“Federation”) enables a federation 

participating organization ("Participant") to use Shibboleth identity attribute sharing 
technologies to manage access to on-line resources that can be made available to the InCommon 
community.  One goal of the Federation is to develop, over time, community standards for such 
cooperating organizations to ensure that shared attribute assertions are sufficiently robust and 
trustworthy to manage access to important protected resources.  As the community of trust 
evolves, the Federation expects that participants eventually should be able to trust each other's 
identity management systems and resource access management systems as they trust their own. 

A fundamental expectation of Participants is that they provide authoritative and accurate 
attribute assertions to other Participants, and that Participants receiving an attribute assertion 
protect it and respect privacy constraints placed on it by the Federation or the source of that 
information.  In furtherance of this goal, InCommon requires that each Participant make 
available to other Participants certain basic information about any identity management system, 
including the identity attributes that are supported, or resource access management system 
registered for use within the Federation. 

Two criteria for trustworthy attribute assertions by Identity Providers are: (1) that the 
identity management system fall under the purview of the organization’s executive or business 
management, and (2) the system for issuing end-user credentials (e.g., PKI certificates, 
userids/passwords, Kerberos principals, etc.) specifically have in place appropriate risk 
management measures (e.g., authentication and authorization standards, security practices, risk 
assessment, change management controls, audit trails, etc.). 

InCommon expects that Service Providers, who receive attribute assertions from another 
Participant, respect the other Participant's policies, rules, and standards regarding the protection 
and use of that data.  Furthermore, such information should be used only for the purposes for 
which it was provided.  InCommon strongly discourages the sharing of that data with third 
parties, or aggregation of it for marketing purposes without the explicit permission1 of the 
identity information providing Participant. 

InCommon requires Participants to make available to all other Participants answers to the 
questions below.2   Additional information to help answer each question is available in the next 
section of this document.  There is also a glossary at the end of this document that defines terms 
shown in italics. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 Such permission already might be implied by existing contractual agreements. 
2 Your responses to these questions should be posted in a readily accessible place on your web site, and 
the URL submitted to InCommon. If not posted, you should post contact information for an office that 
can discuss it privately with other InCommon Participants as needed. If any of the information 
changes, you must update your on-line statement as soon as possible. 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 2 of 12 

 

 

 

InCommon Federation: Participant Operational Practices 
 
1.   Federation Participant Information 

 

1.1 The InCommon Participant Operational Practices information below is for: 

InCommon Participant organization name:  University of Mississippi (UM)   

The information below is accurate as of this date:  July 31, 2017   

1.2 Identity Management and/or Privacy information 
 

Additional information about the Participant’s identity management practices and/or 
privacy policy regarding personal information can be found on-line at the following 
location(s). 

 

URL(s):  www.olemiss.edu/policies                                                                 
 

1.3 Contact information 
 

The following person or office can answer questions about the Participant’s identity 
management system or resource access management policy or practice. 

Name:   Office of Information Technology (IT) Helpdesk                                  
Title or role:  IT Helpdesk Management                                                           
Email address:   helpdesk@olemiss.edu                                                            
Phone:   662-915-5222                             FAX:   662-915-7180                       

 
 
2.   Identity Provider Information 

 

The most critical responsibility that an IdentityProvider Participant has to the Federation is to 
provide trustworthy and accurate identity assertions.3   It is important for a Service Provider 
to know how your electronic identity credentials are issued and how reliable the information 
associated with a given credential (or person) is. 

 

Community 
 

2.1 If you are an Identity Provider, how do you define the set of people who are eligible to 
receive an electronic identity?  If exceptions to this definition are allowed, who must 
approve such an exception? 

 

All active employees, admitted students, retired faculty and staff with 25 years of service or 
emeritus status, parents of admitted students, visiting faculty and authorized  
consultants/contractors are eligible for a UM WebID.  

2.2 “Member of Community”4 is an assertion that might be offered to enable access to 
resources made available to individuals who participate in the primary mission of the 
university or organization.  For example, this assertion might apply to anyone whose 

 
 

3 A general note regarding attributes and recommendations within the Federation is available here: 
http://www.incommonfederation.org/attributes.html 
4 "Member" is one possible value for eduPersonAffiliation as defined in the eduPerson schema. It is 
intended to include faculty, staff, student, and other persons with a basic set of privileges that go with 
membership in the university community (e.g., library privileges). “Member of Community” could 
be derived from other values in eduPersonAffiliation or assigned explicitly as “Member” in the 
electronic identity database. See http://www.educause.edu/eduperson/ 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 3 of 12 

 

 

 

affiliation is “current student, faculty, or staff.” 
 

What subset of persons registered in your identity management system would you identify 
as a “Member of Community” in Shibboleth identity assertions to other InCommon 
Participants? 

 

Individuals with an active UM WebID are considered a Member of Community. 
 

Electronic Identity Credentials 
 

2.3 Please describe in general terms the administrative process used to establish an 
electronic identity that results in a record for that person being created in your electronic 
identity database?  Please identify the office(s) of record for this purpose.  For example, 
“Registrar’s Office for students; HR for faculty and staff.” 

 
 

i. Faculty and staff UM WebIDs are provisioned during employee onboarding through the 
department of Human Resources. 

 
ii. Student UM WebIDs are provisioned during the admissions process, specifically when 

students are admitted.  The office of record is the Registrar’s Office. 
 
iii. UM students can authorize their parents to receive WebIDs through the myOleMiss 

portal.  Parent WebIDs give access to the campus Wi-Fi network and some of the 
myOleMiss portal content and services available to their student.  The parent's level of 
access is determined by what the student has assigned. 

 
iv. Guest accounts (i.e., visiting faculty and authorized consultants/contractors) require 

sponsorship from a faculty or staff member with an active UM WebID.  Requests are 
managed through the myOleMiss portal.  Annually, the sponsor is notified of his/her 
sponsorship(s) and may approve an extension to the sponsored guest account. 

 
 

2.4 What technologies are used for your electronic identity credentials (e.g., Kerberos, 
userID/password, PKI, ...) that are relevant to Federation activities?  If more than one type 
of electronic credential is issued, how is it determined who receives which type?  If 
multiple credentials are linked, how is this managed (e.g., anyone with a Kerberos 
credential also can acquire a PKI credential) and recorded? 

 

Users authenticate with UM WebID and corresponding password using LDAP or Active 
Directory. 

 

2.5 If your electronic identity credentials require the use of a secret password or PIN, and 
there are circumstances in which that secret would be transmitted across a network without 
being protected by encryption (i.e., “clear text passwords” are used when accessing campus 
services), please identify who in your organization can discuss with any other Participant 
concerns that this might raise for them: 

 

UM prohibits the use of clear text passwords. However, it is possible for members of the 
community to set up services that accept clear text passwords. When these are discovered, 
the university works with the service owner to eliminate the use of clear text passwords.  Any 
questions or concerns should be addressed to the UM Security Coordinator (662-915-7206). 

 

2.6 If you support a “single sign-on” (SSO) or similar campus-wide system to allow a 
single user authentication action to serve multiple applications, and you will make use of 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 4 of 12 

 

 

 

this to authenticate people for InCommon Service Providers, please describe the key 
security aspects of your SSO system including whether session timeouts are enforced by the 
system, whether user-initiated session termination is supported, and how use with “public 
access sites” is protected. 

 

UM has implemented SSO using Shibboleth with Box, Campus Labs, EDUCAUSE, 
OrgSync, Maxient, T2 Systems, Terra Dotta and SANS.  Timeouts are enforced on 
each system independently. 

 

UM has also implemented single sign-on with on-premises and cloud hosting systems, 
including the learning management system (Blackboard Learn), campus portal (myOleMiss), 
campus Wi-Fi (UM Wi-Fi Network) and email (Google Apps for Education and Microsoft 
Exchange). These systems support authentication using an active UM WebID. However, a 
login to one system does not automatically enable login to other systems. 

 

2.7 Are your primary electronic identifiers for people, such as “net ID,” 
eduPersonPrincipalName, or eduPersonTargetedID considered to be unique for all time to 
the individual to whom they are assigned?  If not, what is your policy for re-assignment and 
is there a hiatus between such reuse? 

 

UM WebIDs are not reassigned. 
 

Electronic Identity Database 
 

2.8 How is information in your electronic identity database acquired and updated?  Are 
specific offices designated by your administration to perform this function?  Are individuals 
allowed to update their own information on-line? 

 

Electronic identity data is currently acquired from three different sources. Person identity 
data can initially be provided by the user for the creation of his/her UM WebID. Electronic 
identity data is also provided from our human resources system. Finally, electronic identity 
data is also provided from our student information system.  Individuals may update their 
information online through the myOleMiss portal. 

 

2.9 What information in this database is considered “public information” and would be 
provided to any interested party? 

 

Federated identity attributes are released on a per case basis to service providers and will only 
be provided to approved UM parties. Electronic identity data may be published through the 
UM online directory in myOleMiss and the UM phone book. Individual users decide which 
student and employee information is released to the general public.  All considerations are 
made to follow FERPA laws. 

 

Uses of Your Electronic Identity Credential System 
 

2.10 Please identify typical classes of applications for which your electronic identity 
credentials are used within your own organization. 

 

Web applications including myOleMiss and UM Blackboard Learn 
 

Cloud services such as UM Gmail and UM Box 

Active Directory Services for UM Mail (Exchange) 

Central printing services 

UM Wi-Fi Network 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 5 of 12 

 

 

 

Attribute Assertions 
 

Attributes are the information data elements in an attribute assertion you might make to 
another Federation participant concerning the identity of a person in your identity 
management system. 

 

2.11 Would you consider your attribute assertions to be reliable enough to: 
 

[ X ]  control access to on-line information databases licensed to your organization? 

[ X ]  be used to purchase goods or services for your organization? 

[ X ] enable access to personal information such as student loan status? 
 

Privacy Policy 
 

Federation Participants must respect the legal and organizational privacy constraints on 
attribute information provided by other Participants and use it only for its intended purposes. 

 

2.12 What restrictions do you place on the use of attribute information that you might 
provide to other Federation participants? 

 

Attribute information may only be used for the purposes for which it was  
provided. Information provided by UM as part of our participation in InCommon federation 
is not to be reused or redistributed by other parties or members of the federation without  
written approval from UM.  

 

2.13 What policies govern the use of attribute information that you might release to other 
Federation participants?  For example, is some information subject to FERPA or HIPAA 
restrictions? 

 

Information may be subject to FERPA, HIPAA and other laws. 
 
 
 
3.   Service Provider Information 

 

Service Providers are trusted to ask for only the information necessary to make an 
appropriate access control decision, and to not misuse information provided to them by 
Identity Providers.  Service Providers must describe the basis on which access to resources is 
managed and their practices with respect to attribute information they receive from other 
Participants. 

 
 

The University of Mississippi has no service providers. 
 
 

3.1 What attribute information about an individual do you require in order to manage access 
to resources you make available to other Participants?  Describe separately for each service 
ProviderID that you have registered. 

 

 
 

3.2 What use do you make of attribute information that you receive in addition to basic 
access control decisions?  For example, do you aggregate session access records or records 
of specific information accessed based on attribute information, or make attribute 
information available to partner organizations, etc.? 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 6 of 12 

 

 

 

3.3 What human and technical controls are in place on access to and use of attribute 
information that might refer to only one specific person (i.e., personally identifiable 
information)?  For example, is this information encrypted? 

 

 
 

3.4 Describe the human and technical controls that are in place on the management of 
super-user and other privileged accounts that might have the authority to grant access to 
personally identifiable information? 

 
 

3.5 If personally identifiable information is compromised, what actions do you take to 
notify potentially affected individuals? 

 

 
 
 
 
4.   Other Information 

 

4.1 Technical Standards, Versions and Interoperability 
 

Identify the version of Internet2 Shibboleth code release that you are using or, if not using 
the standard Shibboleth code, what version(s) of the SAML and SOAP and any other 
relevant standards you have implemented for this purpose. 

 

Shibboleth 3.2.1 (as of July 2017) 
 

4.2 Other Considerations 
 

Are there any other considerations or information that you wish to make known to other 
Federation participants with whom you might interoperate? For example, are there concerns 
about the use of clear text passwords or responsibilities in case of a security breach involving 
identity information you may have provided? 

 

Please contact it@olemiss.edu for any additional questions. 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 7 of 12 

 

 

 
 

Additional Notes and Details on the Operational Practices Questions 
 
 
As a community of organizations willing to manage access to on-line resources cooperatively, 
and often without formal contracts in the case of non-commercial resources, it is essential that 
each Participant have a good understanding of the identity and resource management practices 
implemented by other Participants.  The purpose of the questions above is to establish a base 
level of common understanding by making this information available for other Participants to 
evaluate. 

 
In answering these questions, please consider what you would want to know about your own 
operations if you were another Participant deciding what level of trust to place in interactions 
with your on-line systems.  For example: 

! What would you need to know about an Identity Provider in order to make an informed 
decision whether to accept its assertions to manage access to your on-line resources or 
applications? 

! What would you need to know about a Service Provider in order to feel confident 
providing it information that it might not otherwise be able to have? 

It also might help to consider how identity management systems within a single institution could 
be used. 

! What might your central campus IT organization, as a Service Provider, ask of a peer 
campus Identity Provider (e.g., Computer Science Department, central Library, or 
Medical Center) in order to decide whether to accept its identity assertions for access to 
resources that the IT organization controls? 

! What might a campus department ask about the central campus identity management 
system if the department wanted to leverage it for use with its own applications? 

 
 
The numbered paragraphs below provide additional background to the numbered questions in the 
main part of this document. 

 
[1.2] InCommon Participants who manage Identity Providers are strongly encouraged to post on 

their website the privacy and information security policies that govern their identity 
management system.  Participants who manage Service Providers are strongly encouraged 
to post their policies with respect to use of personally identifying information. 

 
[1.3] Other InCommon Participants may wish to contact this person or office with further 

questions about the information you have provided or if they wish to establish a more 
formal relationship with your organization regarding resource sharing. 

 
[2] Many organizations have very informal processes for issuing electronic credentials.  For 

example, one campus does this through its student bookstore.  A Service Provider may be 
more willing to accept your assertions to the extent that this process can be seen as 
authoritative. 

 
[2.1] It is important for a Service Provider to have some idea of the community whose identities 

you may represent.  This is particularly true for assertions such as the eduPerson “Member 
of Community.”.  A typical definition might be “Faculty, staff, and active students” but it 
might also include alumni, prospective students, temporary employees, visiting scholars, 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 8 of 12 

 

 

 

etc.  In addition, there may be formal or informal mechanisms for making exceptions to this 
definition, e.g., to accommodate a former student still finishing a thesis or an unpaid 
volunteer. 

 
This question asks to whom you, as an Identity Provider, will provide electronic 
credentials.  This is typically broadly defined so that the organization can accommodate a 
wide variety of applications locally.  The reason this question is important is to distinguish 
between the set of people who might have a credential that you issue and the subset of 
those people who fall within your definition of “Member of Community” for the purpose of 
InCommon attribute assertions. 

 
[2.2] The assertion of “Member of Community” is often good enough for deciding whether to 

grant access to basic on-line resources such as library-like materials or websites. 
InCommon encourages participants to use this assertion only for “Faculty, Staff, and active 
Students” but some organizations may have the need to define this differently.  InCommon 
Service Providers need to know if this has been defined differently. 

 
[2.3] For example, if there is a campus recognized office of record that issues such electronic 

credentials and that office makes use of strong, reliable technology and good database 
management practices, those factors might indicate highly reliable credentials and hence 
trustworthy identity assertions. 

 
[2.4] Different technologies carry different inherent risks.  For example, a userID and password 

can be shared or “stolen” rather easily.  A PKI credential or SecureID card is much harder 
to share or steal.  For practical reasons, some campuses use one technology for student 
credentials and another for faculty and staff.  In some cases, sensitive applications will 
warrant stronger and/or secondary credentials. 

 
[2.5] Sending passwords in “clear text” is a significant risk, and all InCommon Participants are 

strongly encouraged to eliminate any such practice.  Unfortunately this may be difficult, 
particularly with legacy applications.  For example, gaining access to a centralized calendar 
application via a wireless data connection while you are attending a conference might 
reveal your password to many others at that conference.  If this is also your campus 
credential password, it could be used by another person to impersonate you to InCommon 
Participants. 

 
[2.6] “Single sign-on” (SSO) is a method that allows a user to unlock his or her electronic 

identity credential once and then use it for access to a variety of resources and applications 
for some period of time.  This avoids people having to remember many different identifiers 
and passwords or to continually log into and out of systems.  However, it also may weaken 
the link between an electronic identity and the actual person to whom it refers if someone 
else might be able to use the same computer and assume the former user’s identity.  If there 
is no limit on the duration of a SSO session, a Federation Service Provider may be 
concerned about the validity of any identity assertions you might make.  Therefore it is 
important to ask about your use of SSO technologies. 

 
[2.7] In some identity management systems, primary identifiers for people might be reused, 

particularly if they contain common names, e.g. Jim Smith@MYU.edu.  This can create 
ambiguity if a Service Provider requires this primary identifier to manage access to 
resources for that person. 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 9 of 12 

 

 

 
 
[2.8] Security of the database that holds information about a person is at least as critical as the 

electronic identity credentials that provide the links to records in that database. 
Appropriate security for the database, as well as management and audit trails of changes 
made to that database, and management of access to that database information are 
important. 

 
[2.9] Many organizations will make available to anyone certain, limited “public information.” 

Other information may be given only to internal organization users or applications, or may 
require permission from the subject under FERPA or HIPAA rules.  A Service Provider 
may need to know what information you are willing to make available as “public 
information” and what rules might apply to other information that you might release. 

 
[2.10]  In order to help a Service Provider assess how reliable your identity assertions may be, it 

is helpful to know how your organization uses those same assertions. The assumption here 
is that you are or will use the same identity management system for your own applications 
as you are using for federated purposes. 

 
[2.11]  Your answer to this question indicates the degree of confidence you have in the accuracy 

of your identity assertions. 
 
[2.12]  Even “public information” may be constrained in how it can be used.  For example, 

creating a marketing email list by “harvesting” email addresses from a campus directory 
web site may be considered illicit use of that information.  Please indicate what restrictions 
you place on information you make available to others. 

 
[2.13]  Please indicate what legal or other external constraints there may be on information you 

make available to others. 
 
[3.1] Please identify your access management requirements to help other Participants understand 

and plan for use of your resource(s).  You might also or instead provide contact 
information for an office or person who could answer inquiries. 

 
[3.2] As a Service Provider, please declare what use(s) you would make of attribute information 

you receive. 
 
[3.3] Personally identifying information can be a wide variety of things, not merely a name or 

credit card number.  All information other than large group identity, e.g., “member of 
community,” should be protected while resident on your systems. 

 
[3.4] Certain functional positions can have extraordinary privileges with respect to information 

on your systems.  What oversight means are in place to ensure incumbents do not misuse 
such privileges? 

 
[3.5] Occasionally protections break down and information is compromised.  Some states have 

laws requiring notification of affected individuals.  What legal and/or institutional policies 
govern notification of individuals if information you hold is compromised? 



INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

Page 10 of 12 

 

 

 

[4.1] Most InCommon Participants will use Internet2 Shibboleth technology, but this is not 
required.  It may be important for other participants to understand whether you are using 
other implementations of the technology standards. 

 
[4.2] As an Identity Provider, you may wish to place constraints on the kinds of applications that 

may make use of your assertions.  As a Service Provider, you may wish to make a 
statement about how User credentials must be managed.  This question is completely open 
ended and for your use. 



Page 11 of 12 

INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES  

 

Glossary 
 

 
access 
management 
system 

The collection of systems and or services associated with specific on-line 
resources and/or services that together derive the decision about whether to 
allow a given individual to gain access to those resources or make use of 
those services. 

assertion The identity information provided by an Identity Provider to a Service 
Provider. 

attribute A single piece of information associated with an electronic identity 
database record.  Some attributes are general; others are personal.  Some 
subset of all attributes defines a unique individual. 

authentication The process by which a person verifies or confirms their association with 
an electronic identifier.  For example, entering a password that is associated 
with an UserID or account name is assumed to verify that the user is the 
person to whom the UserID was issued. 

authorization The process of determining whether a specific person should be allowed to 
gain access to an application or function, or to make use of a resource.  The 
resource manager then makes the access control decision, which also may 
take into account other factors such as time of day, location of the user, 
and/or load on the resource system. 

electronic 
identifier 

A string of characters or structured data that may be used to reference an 
electronic identity.  Examples include an email address, a user account 
name, a Kerberos principal name, a UC or campus NetID, an employee or 
student ID, or a PKI certificate. 

electronic identity A set of information that is maintained about an individual, typically in 
campus electronic identity databases.  May include roles and privileges as 
well as personal information.  The information must be authoritative to the 
applications for which it will be used. 

electronic identity 
credential 

An electronic identifier and corresponding personal secret associated with 
an electronic identity.  An electronic identity credential typically is issued 
to the person who is the subject of the information to enable that person to 
gain access to applications or other resources that need to control such 
access. 

electronic identity 
database 

A structured collection of information pertaining to a given individual. 
Sometimes referred to as an "enterprise directory."  Typically includes 
name, address, email address, affiliation, and electronic identifier(s).  Many 
technologies can be used to create an identity database, for example LDAP 
or a set of linked relational databases. 



Page 12 of 12 

INCOMMON FEDERATION: PARTICIPANT OPERATIONAL PRACTICES 

identity Identity is the set of information associated with a specific physical person 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
identity 
management 
system 

or other entity.  Typically an Identity Provider will be authoritative for only 
a subset of a person’s identity information.  What identity attributes might 
be relevant in any situation depend on the context in which it is being 
questioned. 
 

A set of standards, procedures and technologies that provide electronic 
credentials to individuals and maintain authoritative information about the 
holders of those credentials. 

 

Identity Provider A campus or other organization that manages and operates an identity 
management system and offers information about members of its 
community to other InCommon participants. 

 

NetID An electronic identifier created specifically for use with on-line 
applications. It is often an integer and typically has no other meaning. 

 

personal secret 
(also 
verification token) 

 

Used in the context of this document, is synonymous with password, pass 
phrase or PIN.  It enables the holder of an electronic identifier to confirm 
that s/he is the person to whom the identifier was issued. 

 

Service Provider       A campus or other organization that makes on-line resources available to 
users based in part on information about them that it receives from other 
InCommon participants. 


