
Missing Student Notification 
DSA.DS.600.001 

 
Definitions 
 

A. Student: For purposes of this policy, a student is any person currently enrolled on the 
Oxford campus. 
 

B. Residential Student: A student who resides in on-campus housing under a housing 
contract/lease and is currently enrolled at the University. 
 

C. Fraternity/Sorority Residential Student: A student who resides in an on-campus 
fraternity or sorority house. 
 

D. Missing: A student may be considered missing if she or he is overdue in reaching home, 
campus, or another specific location past the expected arrival, additional factors lead 
University staff to believe she or he is missing, and a check of the student’s residence 
supports that determination. 

 
Notification to Students 
 
Students will be given an opportunity during the fall term matriculation process to designate an 
individual to be contacted by the University if the student is determined to be missing.  
Returning and transfer students will be given an opportunity to provide this information during 
the fall term.  The designation will remain in effect until changed or revoked by the student. 
 
The form provided for designation will state the circumstances in which the designated 
individual will be contacted and will include a statement that the University is required by law to 
also notify the student’s custodial parent or guardian if the student is under 18, and not an 
emancipated individual, at the time he or she is discovered to be missing.  If a student is 18 years 
of age or older and has not designated an individual to be contacted in the event the student is 
missing, the University will contact the individual that the student listed as an “emergency 
contact” at the time of enrollment.  When a student is missing and the student failed to designate 
an individual to be contacted under those circumstances, university officials, in their sole 
discretion, may contact any person whom they believe may have information about the student’s 
whereabouts. 
 
Procedures for Reporting and Investigating Missing Students 
 

A. Confirmed as a Student: Any University employee or student who receives information 
that a student is missing, and believes she or he is a student, must immediately report the 
information or evidence to the University of Mississippi Police Department (UPD). 
 

B. If the Person is a Student: UPD will conduct a preliminary investigation to verify the 
situation and to determine the circumstances that exist relating to the reported missing 
student.  If UPD determines that the student should be considered missing, an officer will 



contact the Office of Leadership and Advocacy, the appropriate outside law enforcement 
agencies, and, if necessary, the Department of Student Housing to provide the relevant 
information.  The Office of Leadership and Advocacy will relay pertinent information to 
the Office of the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs. 

 
All pertinent law enforcement agencies, including, if known, those operating in the 
student’s normal routes of travel or hometown, will be notified and requested to render 
assistance; all law enforcement agencies involved will receive routine investigation status 
reports during the course of the investigation.  If UPD determines that the student should 
be considered missing, the person making the initial report will be encouraged to make an 
official missing person report to local police. 

 
C. If the student tis a “residential student” or a “fraternity/sorority residential 

student,” the Department of Student Housing or the Office of Fraternal Leadership and 
Learning (fraternity/sorority residential student) will conduct a preliminary investigation 
to verify the situation and to determine the circumstances which exist relating to the 
reported missing student. 

 
1. A staff member will attempt to contact the student via her or his telephone by using 

the number(s) provided. 
 

2. If the student cannot be reached by telephone, a staff member will attempt to visit 
the on-campus room of the student in question to verify the student’s whereabouts 
and/or wellness, and in some cases, deliver a message to contact a parent or family 
member who is searching for the student. 

 
3. If the student is not at the room, but the room is occupied, an attempt will be made to 

gain information on the student’s whereabouts and/or wellness from the occupants. 
 

4. If there is no response to a knock on the door of the residence hall room or there are 
occupants who do not know of the student’s whereabouts, a staff member will enter 
into the room in question, by key if necessary, to perform a health and safety 
inspection.  The staff member will take note of the condition of the room and look 
for visible personal property (wallet, keys, cell phone, clothing, etc.) which might 
provide clues as to whether the student has taken an extended trip or leave from the 
residence hall. 

 
5. If the student is not found in the residence hall room or fraternity or sorority house, 

an attempt will be made to gain information on the student’s whereabouts from 
roommates, other members of the residential community, or other friends. 

 
6. Staff members, at any step in the process, will report immediately any suspicious 

findings to UPD. 
 

7. If these steps provide an opportunity to speak with the missing student, verification 
of the student’s state of health and intention of returning to campus should be made.  



A referral, if needed, may be made to the University Counseling Center or other 
medical agency.  Once the student is found, UPD will be contacted to apprise them 
of the student’s state of health and well-being. 

 
If all of these steps do not provide an opportunity to speak with the missing student or to learn 
her or his whereabouts, UPD will contact, within 24 hours of the student being reported missing, 
the designated contact person as outlined above. 


