
The	University	of	Mississippi 

Page	1	of	4	

	

Mobile	Application	Development	

Summary/Purpose	
This	policy	provides	guidelines	on	how	an	entity	at	the	University	can	work	with	
Information	Technology	and	University	Communications	to	publish	a	mobile	app	to	
the	various	mobile	device	platforms.	

Additionally,	this	policy	provides	guidance	for	apps	which	are	intended	to	be	
published	separately	(e.g.	student	projects,	third-party	distribution,	etc.)	but	may	
contain	references	to	The	University	of	Mississippi	or	any	of	its	trademarks.	

Key	elements	of	the	policy	
• Regular	check-ins	during	development	
• IT	review	before	branding	
• University	Communications	branding	review	
• Party	sign-off	before	submission	
• Clear	indication	to	UMIT	regarding	desired	timeline	for	deployment	

	
• Guidelines	for	non-official	apps	

Summary	of	timelines	
• UM	unit	must	notify	IT	of	its	intent	to	publish	an	app,	at	least	four	weeks	

before	desired	launch	date	
• UM	unit	must	ensure	developer	provides	a	submission	ready	(beta)	test	build	

to	IT	at	least	two	weeks	before	desired	launch	date	
• IT	reserves	two	business	days	for	review	process	

Introduction	
The	Office	of	Information	Technology	(IT)	serves	as	steward	for	official	University	of	
Mississippi	applications	in	the	Amazon	Appstore	for	Android,	Apple	iOS	and	Mac	
App	Stores,	Google	Play	store,	and	Windows	Phone	Store.	University	
Communications	(UC)	serves	as	steward	of	the	University	of	Mississippi	brand	and	
oversees	the	use	of	university	symbols.	Together	both	offices	reserve	the	right	to	
review	application	submissions	for	quality	of	workmanship,	branding,	and	
representative	character.	

All	applications	developed	for	publication	as	official	University	of	Mississippi	
applications	shall	be	subject	to	this	review	whether	developed	internally	by	IT,	
other	university	faculty	or	staff,	externally	by	contracted	agents,	or	by	students	
either	for	work-study	or	academic	projects.	The	UM	school,	department,	or	unit	
(hereafter	referred	to	as	“UM	unit”)	seeking	to	publish	the	application	is	responsible	
for	communication	between	the	developer	and	the	Office	of	Information	Technology	
and	University	Communications.	IT	and	UC	must	be	notified	at	least	four	weeks	and	
at	least	one	test	version	of	the	application	must	be	delivered	at	least	two	weeks	
prior	to	the	intended	application	publication	(“launch”)	date.	IT,	UC,	the	UM	unit,	



The	University	of	Mississippi 

Page	2	of	4	

	

and	the	developer	must	agree	to	the	application’s	quality	before	submission	to	the	
corresponding	publisher(s)	review	process.	Applications	developed	with	regular	
review	submissions	to	IT	and	UC	in	advance	of	the	final	release	will	be	successful	in	
meeting	the	requested	deadline.	

Ownership	of	the	application	
The	UM	unit	is	tasked	with	determining	the	ownership	of	the	application	source	
code	and	responsibility	for	maintenance.	Generally	this	should	rest	with	the	original	
developer	of	the	application.	In	some	cases	the	developer	provides	the	initial	
creation	of	the	application	transferring	ownership	and	maintenance	to	the	UM	unit.	
In	these	cases	IT	shall	not	inherit	these	duties	unless	previously	agreed	upon	e.g.	by	
means	of	an	IT	Work	Order.	

Applications	which	have	fallen	out	of	maintenance	may	be	removed	from	the	
respective	app	stores	to	protect	the	university	brand.	Applications	which	have	
programming,	graphical,	or	logical	errors	(known	colloquially	as	“bugs”)	may	also	
be	removed	from	the	store(s)	if	the	UM	Unit	is	unable	to	procure	a	corrected	version	
of	the	application	in	a	timely	manner.	The	specific	time-period	for	such	a	removal	is	
directly	dependent	upon	the	nature	and	severity	of	the	bug(s)	but	the	base-line	
period	is	10	business	days.	

Management	of	source	code	
Although	ownership	of	the	application	may	rest	with	the	developer	or	the	UM	unit,	
in	order	to	facilitate	testing	and	publication,	IT	may	provide	a	source	code	
repository	(“git	repo”)	for	the	purpose	of	transferring	versions	of	the	application	
source	materials	from	the	developer	as	well	as	feedback	or	revisions	from	IT.	It	is	
the	developer’s	responsibility	to	maintain	the	source	code	utilizing	the	IT	provided	
repo	merely	as	a	means	of	transmission.	

For	applications	that	will	be	transferred	to	the	UM	unit	after	completion,	IT	can	also	
provide	a	repository	for	the	safeguarding	of	the	application	source	code	in	
perpetuity.	Such	a	repo	would	be	configured	for	access	by	a	responsible	person	
within	the	UM	unit.	At	such	time	as	the	code	would	be	needed	for	further	
development,	IT	would	provide	the	developer	with	access	to	the	repository	to	“pull”	
the	source	code.	The	developer	would	be	responsible	for	maintaining	a	separate	
repository	for	day-to-day	development.	

Testing	process	guidelines	
During	development	and	testing,	prior	to	the	final	submission,	the	developer	is	
responsible	for	delivering	test	application	versions	(“builds”)	to	the	UM	unit	for	
testing.	The	UM	unit	should	work	with	the	developer	directly	to	address	any	quality	
concerns	before	signing	off	on	a	version	suitable	for	publication.	Such	a	test	version	
should	consist	of	a	live	application	running	locally	on	a	device	in	control	of	the	UM	
unit.	Remote	control	demonstrations	or	“loaner”	devices	are	not	adequate	for	this	
final	stage	of	testing.	



The	University	of	Mississippi 

Page	3	of	4	

	

Once	the	UM	unit	is	satisfied	with	the	quality	of	the	application,	the	unit	should	
request	the	developer	provide	a	final	testing	build	for	IT	and	UC	to	evaluate.	This	
build	should	be	provided	to	IT	at	least	two	weeks	before	desired	launch	date.	IT	will	
have	two	(2)	business	days	to	perform	the	review.	The	disposition	of	this	testing	
build	is	up	to	the	developer;	however	the	preferred	form	is	an	installable	executable.	
For	iOS	devices,	which	require	a	cryptographically	signed	testing	build,	IT	and	UC	
will	provide	UDIDs	for	this	purpose	or	the	developer	can	provide	a	copy	of	the	
application	source	code	via	IT	git	repo	in	order	for	IT	to	produce	a	test	build	locally.	
It	is	the	developer’s	responsibility	to	ensure	this	source	code	includes	any	external	
dependencies	required	for	compilation.		

Updates	to	existing	applications	will	follow	the	same	guidelines.	If	an	update	is	a	
critical	bug-fix,	IT	will	work	to	facilitate	prompt	turn-around	but	reserves	the	
requirement	of	two	business	days.	

Submission	process	guidelines	
When	available,	the	developer	must	submit	the	finalized	product	to	IT	for	
submission	to	the	various	app	stores.	For	Android	applications	this	should	be	an	
APK	compiled	without	debugging	statements	or	extraneous	logging.	For	iOS	
applications,	which	require	a	cryptographically	signed	distribution	build,	the	
developer	is	responsible	for	providing	either:	a)	an	Xcode	archive	signed	with	an	IT	
provided	developer	identity	or	b)	the	application	source	code	for	IT	to	compile	
directly.	If	providing	source	code,	the	developer	is	requested	to	make	use	of	a	git	
repo	provided	by	IT.		

The	UM	unit	is	responsible	for	procuring	all	marketing	items	required	for	the	
particular	store	listing(s)	to	provide	to	IT	and	University	Communications	to	create	
the	app	entry	or	entries.	Details	for	the	items	required	for	each	store	are	listed	
below;	however	the	standard	items	include	the	following:		

• Name	of	the	application	as	appears	in	the	store(s)	
• Descriptive	summary	
• Representative	screenshots	
• Age-appropriateness	or	content	rating	selection	

Non-official	or	third-party	distributed	applications	
Applications	which	are	not	to	distributed	through	official	UM	app	store	accounts	
(see	links	below)	are	still	required	to	seek	approval	for	use	of	University	
trademarks.	Permission	to	use	such	branding	elements	must	be	requested	from	the	
Office	of	Licensing	as	directed	in	the	“Permission	Required	to	Use	University	
Trademarks”	policy	found	in	the	UM	Policy	Directory.	

• Trademark	policy:	
http://bit.ly/UMTrademarksPolicy	



The	University	of	Mississippi 

Page	4	of	4	

	

Links	to	official	UM	store	listings:	
• Apple	App	Store	account:	

http://appstore.com/universityofmississippi	
• Google	Play	Store	account:	

https://bit.ly/OleMissGoogleApps	
• Amazon	Appstore	account:	

https://bit.ly/OleMissAmazon	


