
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 3 

Outdoor Facilities Reservations – Campus Departments and 

Registered Student Organizations 
 

Summary/Purpose 

 

This policy is for the reservation of all outdoor facilities including the Grove, the Circle, and the 

Student Union Plaza for university-sanctioned activities. 

 

The Grove, Student Union Plaza and the Lyceum Circle are available to University of 

Mississippi campus departments and Registered Student Organizations. For outdoor spaces other 

than those listed, approval must be granted by the Ole Miss Student Union Office and/or 

Landscape Services.  

 

All requests must include ample time before and after the actual event for any needed set up and 

take down.  Campus department or Registered Student Organization will not be granted access to 

the space prior to the designated start time and must vacate the space at the designated end time.  

These times are absolute and the campus department or Registered Student Organization is 

expected to abide by these requirements. 

 

No activities or events may take place in outdoor spaces four (4) weeks prior to Commencement. 

Requests for reservations made during this time period are at the discretion of the Ole Miss 

Student Union office in consultation with campus partners. 

 

Block reservations can be made one semester at a time.  Block reservation requests are defined 

as those that recur more than one time during the semester.  Block reservations that include more 

than one semester will be processed as separate reservations, and fees will be assessed 

accordingly. 

 

Reservation Process 

Campus departments or Registered Student Organizations requesting the use of the Grove, 

Circle, Union Plaza, or any other outdoor space must go through the Ole Miss Student Union 

Reservations Office to officially reserve the space. The department or Registered Student 

Organization will provide the Reservations Office with the name, address and phone number of 

the representative of the campus department or Registered Student Organization.  This 

representative will be the sole person authorized to make changes to or decisions regarding the 

reservation.   

 

Student organizations are required to fill out an Event Registration form online with M-Sync 

prior to reserving outdoor space on campus. 

 

The Student Union Reservations Office does require that a University account number or 

Visa/MasterCard number is provided to ensure that the costs of any damages or excessive 

cleaning can be covered.  

 

A University account number and/or Visa/MasterCard payment must be received by the Student 

Union Reservations Office no later than 4:00 PM on the business day immediately following 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 3 

submission of this request.  If the request is being submitted with only seven days notice, 

payment must be received by the Student Union Reservations Office before the close of the 

current business day that the request is made.  In addition, all necessary paperwork must be 

completed and submitted to the Student Union Reservations Office in accordance with the 

deadlines set forth in this policy.  Failure to meet these deadlines could result in denial of the 

request or cancellation of the event. 

 

The campus department or Registered Student Organization will be responsible for any and all 

damages caused by acts of the campus department or Registered Student Organization, its 

employees, agents, patrons, guests and artists, whether accidental or otherwise. 

 

Preservation of Outdoor Spaces 

 

Landscape Services should be contacted at (662)915-1846 before any plans are made for the 

setup of furnishings and/or equipment in the Grove. 

 

Tent sizes in outdoor spaces are restricted to 10’x10’. For larger tents, Landscape Services must 

approve. No tents are permitted in the Grove or Circle eight (8) weeks prior to Commencement. 

All tents may only be set up for 48 hours; this includes setup, duration of the event, and 

breakdown. 

 

Flooring or artificial turf should be used to protect turf under tents between the Monday after the 

last home football game until after Commencement. Flooring may only be set up for 48 hours; 

this includes setup, duration of the event, and breakdown. 

 

Application of a Special Dura Deck Product or similar will be required for a release to drive a 

vehicle in The Grove. The maximum limit of time is 48 hours.  No vehicles or heavy equipment 

are allowed on turf areas without prior approval of the Director of Landscape Services. 

 

Any large structure erected for use outdoors (i.e. tents) must be inspected by University Fire 

Services. 

 

No objects are to be hung from trees. This includes items such as balloons, hammocks, and 

decorations.  

 

Carnival rides, horse rides, petting zoos, moon walks or bounce houses are not allowed on the 

turf of outdoor spaces. 

 

Stakes or spikes may not be used in outdoor spaces due to underground water and electric lines. 

This includes anchors for tents and signs with stakes.  

 

No open flames are permitted on the turf including portable fireplaces, grills, tiki torches, and 

fireworks. Any exceptions are at the discretion of the Ole Miss Student Union office. 

 

Required University Services 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 3 

The campus department or Registered Student Organization will be responsible for ensuring all 

litter is removed from the outdoor space and placed in proper waste disposal dumpsters within 

two (2) hours of the completion of the event.  If the campus department or Registered Student 

Organization fails to comply, the University will remove trash, and time will be billed to the 

campus department or Registered Student Organization for removal. Registered Student 

Organizations failing to comply may also be referred to the Office of Conflict Resolution and 

Student Conduct. 

 

For events with more than fifty (50) attendees, the campus department or Registered Student 

Organization must submit a work order to Landscape Services for the setup and removal of any 

needed trash cans.  

 

The campus department or Registered Student Organization is responsible for submitting a work 

order to Facilities Management if power or other utilities are required for the reservation. 

 

 


