
Donated Leave Policy 
 

Summary/Purpose:   This policy provides information for employees who are interested in 
becoming a donor or a recipient of donated leave.  Included are qualifying events, definitions, 
and specific guidelines and instructions for requesting such leave.  
 
As enacted by the 2003 Mississippi State Legislature, employees may donate a portion of their 
earned Personal and/or Major Medical Leave to another employee who is suffering from a 
catastrophic injury or illness, or to an employee who is caring for a member of his or her 
immediate family who is suffering from a catastrophic injury or illness.  An immediate family 
member is defined as a spouse, parent, stepparent, sibling, child or stepchild. 
 
A catastrophic injury or illness is defined as a life-threatening injury or illness of an employee 
or a member of an employee’s immediate family which totally incapacitates the employee from 
work, as verified by a licensed physician, and forces the employee to exhaust all leave time 
earned by that employee, resulting in the loss of compensation from a state agency for the 
employee.  Conditions that are short-term in nature, including, but not limited to, common 
illnesses such as influenza, the measles, and common injuries, are not catastrophic.  Chronic 
illnesses or injuries, such as cancer or major surgery, which results in intermittent absences 
from work and which are long-term in nature and require long recuperation periods may be 
considered catastrophic. 

 
Recipient Information: 
To qualify as a recipient, the employee must: 

• be employed with the University of Mississippi for at least one year, and 
• have worked at least 1250 hours in the year preceding the request, and 
• be absent from work because they are suffering from a catastrophic injury or illness or 

caring for a member of the employee’s immediately family who is suffering from a 
catastrophic injury of illness. 

 
Prior to receiving donated leave, the employee must provide the Department of Human 
Resources with medical documentation that is certified by an attending physician that states the 
beginning date of the catastrophic injury or illness, a description of the injury or illness, a 
prognosis for recovery, and the anticipated date that the recipient employee will be able to 
return to work.  Employees shall use the University’s Medical Certification (Form 21) for this 
purpose.  The form is available on the Department of Human Resources website. 
 
The maximum amount of donated leave an employee may receive without returning to work is 
720 hours.   
 
Agencies with more than 500 employees may only receive donated leave from employees 
within the same agency, as such; faculty and staff shall only receive leave donated by 
University of Mississippi employees.    
 
An employee must have exhausted all of their own earned Personal and Major Medical Leave 
before they will be eligible to receive leave donated by another employee. 



 
An employee, whose request for donated leave is denied, may request an appeal of Human 
Resources’ decision.  The employee will be required to complete an Authorization for Release 
of Protected Health Information form authorizing the Department of Human Resources to 
release all medical information, pertaining to the specified injury or illness, to the University 
Employee Health Center for review and determination.  This form is available by contacting 
the Department of Human Resources.   All decisions rendered by the University Employee 
Health Center will be final and no further appeals will be allowed for the specified injury or 
illness. 

 
Donor Information: 
The employee donating leave (“donor employee”) shall: 

• designate the employee who is to receive the leave (“recipient employee”) and 
• indicate the amount of  earned Personal and/or Major Medical Leave that is to be 

donated.  
Employees shall use the University’s Donor Leave Request (Form 17) for this purpose.  The 
form is available on the Department of Human Resources website. 

 
The maximum amount of earned Personal Leave that an employee may donate to any other 
employee may not exceed a number of days that would leave the donor employee with fewer 
than seven (7) days of Personal Leave, and the maximum amount of earned Major Medical 
Leave that an employee may donate to any other employee may not exceed 50 percent (50%) 
of the earned Major Medical Leave of the donor employee.  Leave must be donated in 
increments of 24 hours. 
 
No employee shall donate leave after tendering notice of separation, for any reason, or after 
separation of employment. 
 
University of Mississippi employees may donate leave to employees of other agencies, who are 
deemed an approved recipient, if such agency has fewer than 500 employees.  The external 
donor leave request form is available by contacting the Department of Human Resources.   
 

 
 

 
 


