
Whistleblowing and Whistleblower Protection 
 
 

Summary/Purpose:  Defines “whistleblower,” explains how to report misconduct by an 
individual or organization within the University, and describes the protection given to 
whistleblowers.   
 
The University of Mississippi is committed to maintaining a culture where ethics and integrity 
are not only valued, but practiced.  A part of that culture is the ability of employees and other 
individuals to speak up without fear of retaliation when they have a reasonable belief that 
improper governmental action is taking place.  Examples of improper governmental action 
include, but are not limited to, suspected fraud, waste, or abuse of University funds. 
 
Administrators at all levels of management are responsible for setting the appropriate tone of 
intolerance for misconduct.  Administrators are further responsible for detecting and preventing 
misconduct.  Regardless, if misconduct does occur, employees should feel comfortable in 
reporting it. 
 
How to report misconduct:  Employees who have a reasonable belief that misconduct may be 
occurring, or has occurred, have a duty to report their concerns.  Suspected misconduct may be 
reported to an employee’s immediate supervisor, department chair or dean (or to another 
individual in the employee’s chain of command), the Office of Internal Audit, the Department of 
Human Resources, the Office of the Provost, the Office of Equal Opportunity and Regulatory 
Compliance, or the Office of General Counsel.  Employees who wish to report anonymously 
may do so at the EthicsPoint Hotline 
at https://secure.ethicspoint.com/domain/media/en/gui/31500/index.html .   
 
Protection for whistleblowers:  A “whistleblower” is an employee or student who reports in 
good faith alleged improper action by an individual or an organization within the University.  
The University abides by the state Whistleblower Protection Act, found at Miss. Code Ann. § 25-
9-171 et seq.  The Whistleblower Protection Act prohibits retaliation against individuals who 
provide information to a state investigative body.  In addition to state law, the University 
complies with federal laws that prohibit retaliation against individuals who report improper 
conduct. 
 
How to report retaliation:  If you believe that you have been retaliated against for any 
protected lawful conduct including whistleblowing, contact the Department of Human 
Resources, the Office of the Provost, the Office of Equal Opportunity and Regulatory 
Compliance, or the Office of General Counsel. 
 
Note:  Employees who knowingly make a false report may be subject to discipline.  
Furthermore, the Mississippi Whistleblower Protection Act does not prevent the University from 
disciplining an employee for misconduct or poor performance. 

https://secure.ethicspoint.com/domain/media/en/gui/31500/index.html

