
Code of Ethics and Conduct 
 
Summary/Purpose: Employees at the University are expected to maintain the highest standards 
of ethical conduct.  This policy outlines some sources of information concerning ethical 
standards on campus. 

 
While integrity includes compliance with laws and regulations, employees of the University of 
Mississippi are expected to go beyond mere compliance and to maintain the highest standards of 
ethical conduct.  Rules of fairness, honesty, accuracy, and respect for the rights of others should 
govern conduct when acting in the scope of one’s employment or when representing the 
University in the greater community.  Employees are cautioned that even the appearance of 
misconduct or impropriety can damage the reputation of the University. 

 
An important statement of values for members of the University community is the University of 
Mississippi Creed: 

 
The University of Mississippi is a community of learning dedicated to nurturing 
excellence in intellectual inquiry and personal character in an open and diverse 
environment. As a voluntary member of this community: 

 
I believe in respect for the dignity of each person 
I believe in fairness and civility 
I believe in personal and professional integrity 
I believe in academic honesty 
I believe in academic freedom 
I believe in good stewardship of our resources 
I pledge to uphold these values and encourage others to follow my example. 

 
 
 
Employees who have a reasonable belief that misconduct may be occurring have a duty to report 
their concerns.  Suspected misconduct may be reported to an employee’s immediate supervisor, 
the chair or dean of their department (or another individual in the employee’s chain of 
command), the Office of Internal Audit, the Department of Human Resources, the Office of the 
Provost, the Office of Equal Opportunity and Regulatory Compliance, or the Office of General 
Counsel.  Employees who wish to report anonymously may do so at the EthicsPoint Hotline at 
https://secure.ethicspoint.com/domain/media/en/gui/31500/index.html .  Employees who report 
in good faith alleged improper action are protected from retaliation as outlined in the 
University’s Whistleblower Policy (CHA.AM.100.110). 

 
Employees are expected to act in accordance with state and federal laws and regulations, the 
policies of the University of Mississippi (www.olemiss.edu/policies) and the policies of the 
Board of Trustees of the Institutions of Higher Education (“IHL”) 
(http://www.mississippi.edu/board/downloads/policiesandbylaws.pdf).  The requirements of 
these authorities are incorporated into this Code of Ethics and Conduct.  Depending on the 
severity of the violation, employees who are thought to be in violation of these authorities may 

https://secure.ethicspoint.com/domain/media/en/gui/31500/index.html
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies
http://www.mississippi.edu/board/downloads/policiesandbylaws.pdf


be placed on suspension during an investigation.  Employees found to be in violation are subject 
to discipline, including termination. 

 
Mississippi’s State Conflict of Interest Law for state officials and employees can be found at 
Mississippi Code Annotated, Sections 25-4-101 et seq. 
The Ethics Policy for IHL is policy number 1201 in the IHL Policies and Bylaws handbook: 
(http://www.mississippi.edu/board/downloads/policiesandbylaws.pdf). 

 
Numerous questions about appropriate conduct can be answered by consulting the University of 
Mississippi Policy Directory (www.olemiss.edu/policies).  The following is a non-exhaustive list 
of policies governing employee conduct – and some policies address student conduct as well. 
Questions about the applicability of any particular law, policy or regulation may be directed to 
the Office of General Counsel at 662-915-7014. 

 
 
 
Employee Conflict of Interest (HRO.EM.300.300):  Provides guidelines for determining 
whether an employee has a conflict of interest in regard to a business transaction or relationship. 

 
Fiscal Misconduct (CHA.IA.100.028):  Defines fiscal misconduct and outlines responsibilities 
for detecting and dealing with fiscal misconduct. 

 
Non-Institutional Employment Practices (Outside Employment) (HRO.EM.300.310): 
Requires employees to complete HR Form 9 and receive supervisory approval before engaging 
in employment outside the University. 

 
Objectivity in Research (RSP.VC.100.002):  Provides standards for avoiding conflicts of 
interest when conducting research and guidelines for protecting the credibility and integrity of 
research at the University. 

 
Responding to Allegations of Research Misconduct (RSP.VC.100.003):  Outlines the 
University’s procedure for responding to allegations of research misconduct. 

 
Responsibilities of Signatory Officers (ADM.AC.200.900):  Explains the attestations made by 
an employee approving an expenditure request for a department. 

 
Travel Reimbursement (PUR.TR.111.001):  Provides guidelines for travel reimbursement and 
applicable penalties for fraudulent claims. 

 
Procurement Card Violations (PUR.PC.107.004):  Describes five activities that are illegal uses 
of University procurement cards and the penalties for each. 

 
Bids-Conflict of Interest (PUR.PO.109.007):  Provides rules for avoiding a conflict of 
interest when selling surplus equipment. 

 
Inappropriate Use of Funds (PUR.AP.100.001):  Outlines basic guidelines for using University 
funds. 

http://www.mississippi.edu/board/downloads/policiesandbylaws.pdf
http://www.olemiss.edu/policies


 
Misrepresenting Personal Purchases as University Business (PUR.PO.109.002):  Prohibits 
purchasing personal items under the University’s name. 

 
Contractual Authority (CHA.AM.100.109):  Defines who may sign a contract binding the 
University. 


