
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

Policy Name:  3.5 Verification 
 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for Verification. 
 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements. All policies and 

procedures below are in accordance with the Federal Student Aid 

Handbook. 
 

Policy Contents:  

3.5   Verification Overview 

3.5.1  Institutional Verification Selection Criteria 

3.5.2  Items to be Verified  

3.5.3  Acceptable and Alternative Documentation 

3.5.4  Comment Codes 400/401 

3.5.5  IRS Request Errors 

3.5.6  Verification Deadlines 

3.5.7  Verification Exemptions 

3.5.8  Process for Updating Information 

3.5.9  Consequences for FAFSA Data Changes 

3.5.10  Interim Disbursements 

3.5.11  Conflicting Data 

3.5.12  Process for Handling Overpayment Cases 

3.5.13  Notification Method 

3.5.14  Fraud and Criminal Misconduct 
 

Definitions and Terms: 

 AGI – Adjusted Gross Income  

DOE – Department of Education  

EFC – Expected Family Contribution  

FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid  

FERPA – Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act  

IRA – Individual Retirement Account  

IRS – Internal Revenue Service  

IRS-DRT – IRS Data Retrieval Tool  

ISIR – Institutional Student Information Report  

OFA – Office of Financial Aid  

 PJ – Professional Judgment  

PPY – Prior-Prior Year (refers to tax information required on FAFSA) 

 SAR – Student Aid Report (a processed FAFSA)  

SEOG – Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant 

http://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/attachments/1516FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.pdf
http://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/attachments/1516FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.pdf


 

Part 3.5 Verification Overview 

 

Verification is an important process created by the DOE that confirms the accuracy of 

information submitted on the FAFSA, and requires correction of any inaccurate 

information. Through collecting and reviewing additional documentation, verification 

ensures fair and accurate distribution of federal funds during the financial aid awarding 

process. Additionally, the OFA may institutionally select a student’s FAFSA for 

verification where further clarification is needed, or to resolve conflicting data. 

 

After completing the FAFSA, students will be notified by the DOE if they are selected 

for verification. An asterisk (*) appearing next to the EFC number on the SAR indicates 

that the student has been selected for verification. Additionally, a paragraph within the 

SAR explains that the student has been selected.  

 

Students selected for verification also receive regular email notifications from the OFA. 

A customized verification worksheet (specific to each student showing student ID 

number and based on verification selection) is available to students via the award 

notification in MyOleMiss.  

 

The OFA will compare information from the student’s FAFSA with other required 

documentation (including but not limited to the verification worksheet and tax 

documentation) and make any FAFSA changes on the student’s behalf as necessary. 

Student/parents SHOULD NOT make any changes to the FAFSA during verification as it 

will further delay processing. 

 

Beginning with the 2017-18 FAFSA processing year, and for all processing years 

thereafter, “prior-prior-year” (PPY) tax and income information is required on the 

FAFSA application and to complete the verification process. The chart below indicates 

what year’s tax information is needed for the respective academic year FASFA 

application and to complete verification for that year: 

 

FAFSA Application for Academic Year Required Tax/Income Information 

2019-20 2017 

2020-21 2018 

 

 

Correspondence: 

 

Please note that all correspondence from the OFA will be carried out through email. 

Therefore, the student is responsible for checking his or her Ole Miss email account 

regularly. If the student does not use their Ole Miss account, it is recommended that he or 

she forward it to an active email account. 

 



 

Part 3.5.1 Institutional Verification Selection Criteria 

 

In addition to individual decisions about selecting students for institutional verification, 

the automated load of new SARs into the OFA’s system is programmed to require 

institutional verification if the following criteria apply: 

 

 The student is listed as a Dependent, 

 The student is eligible to receive a Federal Pell grant, 

 Parent reported total income of $0.00,  

 The student has not been selected by the federal processor verification. 
 

 

Part 3.5.2 Items to be Verified  

 
The OFA reserves the right to require a student to verify any FAFSA information and to 

provide any reasonable documentation relevant to the student’s eligibility for Title IV aid. 

The OFA verifies all items as mandated by the DOE. The verification tracking groups are 

listed below. 
 

Verification 

Tracking 

Flag 

Verification Tracking 

Group Name FAFSA Information Required to be Verified 

V1 Standard Verification 

Group 

Tax Filers 

 Adjusted Gross Income  

 U.S. Income Tax Paid  

 Untaxed Portions IRA Distributions  

 Untaxed Portions of Pensions 

 IRA Deductions and Payments  

 Tax Exempt Interest Income  

 Education Tax Credits  

  

Nontax Filers  

 Income Earned from Work  

  

Tax Filers and Nontax Filers 

 Number of Household Members  

 Number in College  

V4 Custom Verification 

Group 
High School Completion Status 

Identity/Statement of Educational Purpose  



V5 Aggregate Verification 

Group 
Tax Filers  

 Adjusted Gross Income  

 U.S. Income Tax Paid  

 Untaxed Portions of IRA Distributions  

 Untaxed Portions of Pensions  

 IRA Deductions and Payments  

 Tax Exempt Interest Income  

 Education Tax Credits  

  

Nontax Filers  

            Income earned from work  

 

Tax Filers and Nontax Filers 

 Number of Household Members  

 Number in College  

 High School Completion Status  

 Identity/Statement of Educational Purpose  

 

 

Part 3.5.3 Acceptable and Alternative Documentation  

 

The DOE provides guidance and regulations regarding acceptable and/or alternative 

documentation used to verify the information outlined in the previous table (c.f., Federal 

Register, Vol. 84, No. 101, Electronic Announcement of May 24, 2019). 

  

When verifying tax and income information, the OFA will complete verification using 

the alternative documentation for certain circumstances as listed below: 

 

For students/parents who are separated, divorced, widowed, or re-married to 

someone else since filing a joint tax return: 

 

In this situation, it may not be possible to use the IRS Data Retrieval Tool. Therefore, to 

complete verification, students/parents must submit ALL the following documentation: 

 

 A Tax Return Transcript or Record of Account Transcript obtained from the IRS 
for the applicable tax year listing the income and tax information required to be 

verified, and if re-married, the step-parent’s (for dependent students), or spouse’s 

(for independent married students) transcript; and 

 For Dependent students:  W-2 forms/applicable tax schedules (C, F, K-1 form 
1065) for each source of employment income for the applicable tax year for the 

parent reported on the FAFSA, and if the parent is now re-married, W-2 

forms/applicable tax schedules (C, F, K-1 form 1065) for the step-parent. For 

Independent students who are re-married: W-2 forms/applicable tax schedules 

(C, F, K-1 form 1065) for each source of employment income for the applicable 

tax year for the student and their spouse. 

https://ifap.ed.gov/fregisters/FR052419.html
https://ifap.ed.gov/fregisters/FR052419.html


For student/parent tax filers granted a filing extension by the IRS:  

 

Tax-filers who have been granted the automatic six-month extension for filing their 

return (i.e., until mid-October) must complete verification either by using the IRS Data 

Retrieval Tool or submitting the IRS Tax Return Transcript(s) to the OFA. Only 

student/parent tax-filers granted a tax-filing extension beyond the automatic six-month 

extension by the IRS may complete verification by submitting ALL the following 

documentation: 

 A copy of IRS Form 4868*, “Application for Automatic Extension of Time to 
File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return,” that the individual filed with the IRS for 

the applicable tax year;  

 If applicable, a copy of the IRS’s approval of an extension beyond the automatic 
six-month extension if the individual requested an additional extension of the 

filing time for the applicable tax year; 

 The “Verification of Non-Filing Letter” obtained from the IRS or other relevant 
taxing authority dated on or after October 1;  

 A copy of IRS Form W-2 forms, and/or applicable tax schedules (C, F, K-1 form 
1065) for each source of earned income received for the applicable tax year; and 

 If self-employed, a signed statement certifying the amount of AGI and U.S. 
income tax paid for the applicable tax year. 

 

The OFA requests that individuals granted filing extensions submit tax information 

using the IRS-DRT or by obtaining a tax return transcript from the IRS after the income 

tax return for the applicable tax year is filed and fully processed by the IRS. In these 

cases, the OFA re-verifies the FAFSA information. 

 

*NOTE:  For tax-filers who requested an extension beyond the automatic six-month 

extension, and were called up for active duty or for qualifying National Guard duty 

during a war or other military operation or national emergency, in lieu of IRS Form 4868, 

tax-filers must submit a written, signed statement certifying the tax-filer has not filed an 

income tax return for the applicable tax year, or a request for a tax-filing extension 

because of that military service.  

 

For student/parent tax filers who file (or will file) an amended tax return: 

 

 A signed copy of IRS form 1040X “Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax 
Return” for the applicable tax year, AND  

 The IRS tax return transcript (which does not have to be signed), or any other IRS 
tax transcript that includes the applicable tax year information required to be 

verified, AND  

 All W-2 forms and applicable tax schedules (C, F, K-1 form 1065) for the 
applicable tax year. 

 



For student/parent tax filers who are victims of identity theft as related to tax-filing 

purposes: 

 

 A Tax Return Database View (TRDBV) transcript obtained from the IRS; AND 

 A statement signed and dated by the tax filer indicating that the tax filer was a 
victim of IRS tax-related identity theft and the IRS was made aware of the tax 

related identity theft. 

 

NOTE:  To inform the IRS of the tax-related identity theft and obtain a TRDBV 

transcript, student/parent tax filers must contact the IRS Identity Protection Specialized 

Unit (IPSU) at 1-800-908-4490. Upon authentication of the tax filer’s identity, the IPSU 

will provide tax filer a TRDBV for the applicable tax year. Tax filers who cannot obtain a 

TRDBV transcript may instead submit another official IRS transcript or equivalent 

document provided by the IRS if it includes all income and tax information required to be 

verified. OFA reserves the right to request further validation from the IRS (e.g., 

signature, validation stamp, etc.) if deemed necessary. 

 

For non-tax filers: 

 

Student/parent non-tax filers must submit W-2 form(s), IRS 1099-MISC form(s), and/or 

applicable tax schedules (C, F, K-1 form 1065) for each source of earned income (for 

independent married students, also the spouse’s W-2 forms, 1099-MISC forms, and/or 

applicable tax schedules). For any source of income not documented by W-2 forms or 

other tax documents, the OFA requires inclusion of amount(s) and source(s) of earned 

income on the verification worksheet, or a separate signed statement, which verifies 

amounts the sources of income earned from work not on W-2s and certifies that the 

person has not filed and is not required to file a tax return. In some cases, the OFA 

requires a student or parent to submit a statement of financial support documenting 

household expenses, the amounts and sources of income, and any other pertinent 

information documenting financial support of the household (usually requested using a 

Statement of Financial Support form as developed by OFA). 

 

In addition to the forms or tax schedules listed above, the following is required:  

 For non-tax filing parents of dependent students, the Verification of Non-Filing 
Letter obtained from the IRS, dated on or after October 1, 2018 (for 2019-20 

verification), or October 1, 2019 (for 2020-21 verification).  

 For non-tax filing independent students, the Verification of Non-Filing Letter 
obtained from the IRS, dated on or after October 1, 2018 (for 2019-20 

verification), or October 1, 2019 (for 2020-21 verification), and if the student is 

married, the same for the spouse, if the spouse did not or was not required to file a 

tax return.  

 

In some cases, if there is reason to believe that a person would have been required to file 

a U.S. tax return, the OFA may request that the non-tax filer submit the IRS “Verification 

of Non-Filing Letter” (NOTE: verification of non-filing is not an indication that the 

person is not required to file a tax return, just that the tax filer did not file one. Also, the 



OFA will not accept confirmation of non-filing status for an upcoming aid year if the 

documentation is dated prior to October 1). 

 

For persons who did not, but are required to file a tax return: 

 

In some cases, when the OFA suspects the student/parent must file a tax return, the OFA 

will not complete verification until a return is filed and fully processed by the IRS (so 

that the student/parent could use the IRS-DRT, or request an IRS tax return transcript).  

The OFA makes this determination by using the IRS calculator “Do I Need to File a Tax 

Return?” 

 

For residents of the Freely Associated States:  

 

Residents of the Freely Associated States (the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the 

Republic of Palau, or the Federated States of Micronesia, a U.S. territory or 

commonwealth or a foreign government), who have not or are not required to file a tax 

return, under IRS or other relevant tax authority rules, must provide the following:  

 A signed statement certifying that the individual has not and was not required to 
file an income tax return for the applicable tax year; and  

 Documentation of sources of income earned from work for the applicable tax year 
and the amount of income for each source; and  

 W-2 forms for each source of employment or equivalent documentation for the 
applicable tax year; and  

 except for dependent students, confirmation of non-filing from the IRS (i.e., 
“Verification of Non-Filing Letter”) or other relevant tax authority dated on or 

after October 1, 2018 (for 2019-2020 verification), or October 1, 2019 (for 2020-

21 verification). 

 

For persons filing foreign tax returns: 

 

Persons from a foreign country who are not required to file a U.S. tax return but filed a 

foreign tax return are required to submit the foreign tax return with translated information 

and income information converted to U.S. dollars of the information that corresponds 

most closely with the income information reported on a U.S. tax return that are the items 

required to be verified. 

http://www.irs.gov/uac/Do-I-Need-to-File-a-Tax-Return%3F
http://www.irs.gov/uac/Do-I-Need-to-File-a-Tax-Return%3F


 

Part 3.5.4 Comment Code 400 & 401 

 

Beginning with the 2018–19 FAFSA, transferred tax/income data as a result of using the 

IRS Data Retrieval Tool will not display to the applicant or parent (nor can corrections be 

made after the transfer on that FAFSA or any subsequent FAFSA). Certain indicators on 

the FAFSA (Comment Codes 400 for parent information, and 401 for student 

information) are assigned if there is potential erroneous information for the student or 

parent.  

The information below lists certain circumstances that indicate erroneous student or 

parent information on the FAFSA:  

 

For Dependent Students and Independent Students  

 Student is a tax filer (FAFSA Question 32) and the AGI retrieved from the IRS is 
zero, but the total income earned from work (FAFSA Questions 39 and 40) is 

greater than zero.  

 The total of the Additional Financial Information fields reported on the FAFSA 
form (FAFSA Questions 44a-f) is greater than the AGI transferred from the IRS.  

 Any item from the FAFSA list of Untaxed Income (FAFSA Questions 45a-j) is 
equal to or exceeds the AGI transferred from the IRS.  

 

For Parents of Dependent Students  

 Parent is a tax filer (FAFSA Question 80) and the AGI retrieved from the IRS is 
zero, but the total income earned from work (FAFSA Questions 88 and 89) is 

greater than zero.  

 The total of the Additional Financial Information fields reported on the FAFSA 
form (FAFSA Questions 93a-f) is greater than the AGI transferred from the IRS.  

 Any item from the FAFSA list of Untaxed Income (FAFSA Questions 94a-i) is 
equal to or exceeds the AGI transferred from the IRS.  

 

When there is erroneous student or parent information on the FAFSA (based on the 

assigning of Comment Codes 400 or 401), the OFA must review the relevant data items 

for all possible conditions noted above to ensure correct information is used to determine 

the applicant’s Title IV eligibility. In many instances, this review may require contacting 

the student or parent and obtaining documentation to support the accuracy of the 

information. The OFA must submit appropriate FAFSA corrections to correct any 

information, and if necessary, adjust student awarding if eligibility changes. 

 



 

Part 3.5.5 IRS Request Errors 

 

Changes made to the FAFSA that make student/parent ineligible to use the IRS-

DRT:  
 

If the student or parent was eligible to use the IRS DRT and transferred data from the 

IRS, but after submission of the FAFSA, a subsequent change made the applicant or 

parent ineligible to use the IRS DRT, the OFA must contact the applicant or parent, as 

applicable, to determine if the income tax return information that was transferred into the 

FAFSA form is correct given the changes the applicant or parent made to IRS DRT 

eligibility criteria, and make any necessary changes to the applicant’s FAFSA as needed, 

and if necessary, adjust student awarding if eligibility changes.  

 

Successful use of the IRS-DRT but the tax-filer had an amended tax return:  
 

In some cases, the student or parent links to the IRS and successfully uses the IRS Data 

Retrieval Tool, but after doing so, the IRS determines that the tax filer has an amended 

return on file for the relevant tax year (2018 for the 2020-21 FAFSA). The income and 

tax information that is transferred to the FAFSA from the IRS will be from the originally 

filed tax return and will not include changes that were made on the amended tax return 

(IRS Form 1040X).  

 

When this occurs, the OFA must contact the applicant or parent, as applicable, and make 

any necessary changes to the FAFSA, regardless of whether the FAFSA was required to 

be verified, and if necessary, adjust student awarding if eligibility changes.  

 

 

Part 3.5.6 Verification Deadlines 

 

The deadline for verification (as determined by the DOE) is usually September 29
th

 or 

120 days after the student’s last date of enrollment, whichever date is earlier. 

 

 

Part 3.5.7 Verification Exemptions 

 

The OFA may choose not to verify an applicant’s FAFSA data in certain cases. However, 

these exemptions do not excuse the OFA from its requirement to resolve conflicting 

information.  

 

The OFA will not verify an applicant’s FAFSA data if: 

 

 The applicant dies; 

 The applicant does not receive assistance under the Title IV, HEA programs for 
eligibility reasons other than failure to verify FAFSA information; 

 



 

 

 

The OFA will verify an applicant’s FAFSA data if: 

 

 The applicant is eligible to receive only unsubsidized student financial 
assistance; OR 

 The applicant transfers to The University of Mississippi, even if verification 
has been performed at the prior institution.   

 

Unless the OFA has reason to believe that the information reported by a dependent 

student is incorrect, it need not verify the applicant's parents' FAFSA information if: 
 

 The parents are residing in a country other than the United States and cannot 
be contacted by normal means of communication; 

 The parents cannot be located because their contact information is unknown 
and cannot be obtained by the applicant; or 

 Both of the applicant's parents are mentally incapacitated. 
 

Unless the Office of Financial Aid has reason to believe that the information reported by 

an independent student is incorrect, it need not verify the applicant's spouse's information 

if: 
 

 The spouse is deceased; 

 The spouse is mentally incapacitated; 

 The spouse is residing in a country other than the United States and cannot be 
contacted by normal means of communication; or 

 The spouse cannot be located because his or her contact information is 
unknown and cannot be obtained by the applicant. 

 

 

Part 3.5.8 Process for Updating Information 

 

The OFA completes the verification process in four steps: 

 

1. Collection of acceptable documentation. 
2. Review of collected documentation.  
3. Request for additional documentation/information, corrections to FAFSA or 

corrections to student/parent tax documents as needed. 

4. Verification corrections made, as needed, to the student’s FAFSA once the review 
process is completed. 



 

 

Part 3.5.9 Consequences for FAFSA Data Changes 

 

Changes in an applicant’s FAFSA may result in: 

 

 A change in the student’s eligibility or ineligibility for federal, state, or 
institutional need-based aid  

 Paybacks on any federal financial aid already awarded 
 

If an adjustment must be made to a student’s packaging due to a change in the student’s 

FAFSA info (made by the OFA, the student, parent, or another institution) – the OFA 

will notify the student if those changes are justified. 

 

 

Part 3.5.10 Interim Disbursements 

 

Federal regulations allow for financial aid offices to release one disbursement of Pell 

and/or SEOG prior to the completion of verification (or after verification, but before 

receiving the corrected FAFSA from the central processor.)  However, the OFA does not 

currently allow for interim disbursements.  

 

 

Part 3.5.11 Conflicting Data 

 

If any verified FAFSA data is changed after verification by the student/parent or another 

institution and conflicts with the FAFSA data that has already been verified by the OFA, 

the OFA will: 

 

 Return all verified data to the values confirmed after the OFA’s previous 

verification process, and; 

 Make needed adjustments to the student’s financial aid awards 

 

The OFA may resolve conflicting FAFSA data by contacting the student and/or parents 

directly, or through the PJ process. 

 

 

Part 3.5.12 Process for Handling Overpayment Cases 

 

In the case of overpayment of federal funds to a student’s bursar account, the OFA will: 

 

 Reimburse the DOE for the overpayment amount. 

 Charge the student’s bursar account for the equivalent overpayment amount. 

 

 

 



Part 3.5.13 Notification Methods 

 

Through July 1
st
, all incoming freshmen who are flagged for verification will be mailed 

paper letters to their permanent mailing address which contain detailed information on 

the process and how to complete it for the upcoming year. Thereafter, they will receive 

email prompts to their Ole Miss email address.  Continuing undergraduate students and 

all graduate/professional students will be notified via email. 

 

During the Verification Process 

 

During the verification process, students will be notified by the OFA by email and/or 

phone when additional documentation or information is needed. 

 

Students selected for the verification process will receive emails with information 

explaining the student’s current status and required actions. 

 

When the verification process is complete and financial aid has been awarded, the student 

will be notified.  Incoming freshmen will receive an initial paper notification.  Continuing 

undergraduate students and graduate/professional students will receive notification via 

email. 

 

Based on FERPA regulations, and when the student signs the FAFSA and verification 

worksheet, the student gives permission to the OFA to disclose or discuss FAFSA 

information with any reporting parent or spouse listed on the FAFSA when necessary.   

 

 

Part 3.5.14 Fraud and Criminal Misconduct 

 

After conducting the review of an applicant’s FAFSA information, any credible 

information indicating that an applicant for Title IV assistance engaged in fraud or other 

criminal misconduct in connection with his/her application will be reviewed for referral 

to the DOE Office of Inspector General.  

 

Examples of cases that the OFA may refer to the DOE include but are not limited to: 

 

 False claims of independent student status 

 False claims of citizenship 

 Use of false identities 

 Forgery of signatures or certifications 

 False statements of income 


