
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  Federal Work Study 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies 

and procedures for Federal Work Study (FWS). 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements. All policies and 

procedures below are in accordance with the Federal Student Aid 

Handbook. 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

5.0  FWS Policies and Procedures Overview 

5.1   Selection and Awarding of Students 

5.2    Assigning FWS Jobs  

5.3   FWS Fiscal Procedures and Records 

5.4   Job Location and Development Program  

    5.5  Work Colleges Program  

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 FWS – Federal Work Study 

 HR – Human Resources  

 JLD – Job Location and Development Program 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid  

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 

 

 

 

 

http://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/attachments/1516FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.pdf
http://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/attachments/1516FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.pdf


 

Part 5.0 Federal Work Study (FWS) Policies and Procedures Overview 

 

FWS provides part-time jobs for undergraduate and graduate students with financial need, 

allowing them to earn money to help pay for their educational expenses. FWS encourages 

community service and work related to the student’s course of study.   

 

Part-time employment of 8-10 hours per week is available to undergraduate students in 

various departments across campus.  FWS-eligible graduate assistantships in departments 

selected by the Graduate School may receive FWS funds.   

The OFA will maintain an online Student Guide to Federal Workstudy Program. 

 

Part 5.1 Selection and Awarding of Students 

 

All students (full-time/part-time, dependent/independent) must have a complete FAFSA on 

file in order to be considered for FWS and be admitted to UM. 

 

Undergraduates 

 

Undergraduates will be automatically awarded Fall/Spring FWS through the financial aid 

system (until the annual allocation is fully committed) if they fall into one of the categories 

below: 

 

1. Recipients of the Ole Miss Opportunity Grant (the institution’s guarantee program 
for Mississippi residents with significant financial need), regardless of whether or 

not they expressed interest in FWS on their FAFSA. 

2. Students who received FWS in the prior Spring, regardless of whether or not they 
expressed interest on their FAFSA for the current aid year. 

3. Students who expressed interest in FWS on their FAFSA. 
 

These students must meet the following criteria: 

 

• Be an eligible student per the Federal Title IV regulations, and have no holds on the 
FAFSA (which includes completing and/or resolving any requirements for 

verification and citizenship, among other items). 

• Have unmet need less than or equal to $4,000. 

• Was never terminated from a FWS job for cause (which flags the student for 
lifetime exclusion from the program). 

• Be a regular degree-seeking student (not visiting or in a special status). 

• Have planned enrollments for either Fall or Spring terms. 

• Have “planned enrollment” data that is consistent with the student’s first term of 
admission.  (For example, a student cannot be admitted for Spring 2018 but have 

planned enrollment for Fall 2018.  The OFA will attempt to resolve mismatches.) 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/worksty_student_guide/
https://fafsa.gov/


• Have no athletic aid in the prior Spring term. 

• Attend the Oxford campus. 
 

If all conditions above are met, then FWS is awarded at the level of $2000 for Fall/Spring 

or $1000 for Fall-only or Spring-only.  These amounts can only be increased with the 

permission of an OFA supervisor. 

 

Students who are not automatically packaged with FWS (e.g. Regional Campus students) 

may still qualify after a review of their eligibility.  When funds are available, students who 

request a review can be manually awarded FWS on a case-by-case basis.  

 

Summer FWS is available upon request, with priority given to those students who received 

it during the regular academic year.  Since summer is considered a trailer to the award year, 

the remaining funds are typically limited.  Students must be enrolled during the summer 

modules in which they wish to work. Summer FWS is limited to students enrolled in first 

summer, and/or second summer, or full summer (FWS is not awarded for May or August 

intersessions). 

 

Graduate Students 

 

FWS funds for graduate students are used to pay up to 75% of assistantship stipends.  

Based on the annual FWS allocation, the OFA determines how much funding can be used 

for graduate stipends each year.  The Graduate School is notified of the available amount in 

order to prioritize needs among the various graduate programs and determine which 

departments will be allowed to utilize FWS funding.  This decision is shared with the OFA. 

 

Graduate assistants receiving FWS are selected by each authorized department.  The 

department creates an electronic Form 7, “Students Paid on a Salaried Basis”, that is first 

forwarded to the Graduate School for approval and then routed to the OFA to confirm that 

the student is eligible for FWS.  If so, the FWS account information and percentage of FWS 

contribution is added to the form and approved.  The form is then routed to HR for payroll 

processing.  The amount of the gross salary is entered into the financial aid package. 

 

Graduate assistants receiving FWS funds are typically employed 25% (10 hours per week) 

or 50% (20 hours per week).  Actual stipend amounts are determined by individual 

departments.  The recommended minimums for 25% employment are $5,000 and for 50% 

employment, $10,000. Students are paid bi-monthly. 

 

Federal regulations specify that Work-Study funds are for employment only. Therefore, 

they are not allowed for fellowships or Study Abroad experiences.  Appropriate training, 

coaching, and oversight should be provided.  GWS supervisors are expected to monitor a 

GWS student’s work activity and performance.  

 

The following policy applies to students hired as graduate assistants:   

Course Load Requirements for Graduate Student Employees (HR policy number 10000356; 

policy code HRO.EM.300.080) 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10648012
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10648012


 

Part 5.2 Assigning FWS Jobs 

 

Undergraduates 

 

The OFA does not assign students to specific FWS jobs.  Instead, students seek out and 

apply for FWS placements, although the OFA assists students by providing job leads. 

 

At the beginning of the Fall, Spring, and Summer terms, the OFA sends notifications to all 

departments soliciting FWS job postings for the upcoming term. Campus departments 

submit their position requests via MyOleMiss with the following information:  

• Term of assignment(s) 

• Department name and account 

• Supervisor name, email, address, and phone 

• Job title 

• Job purpose, qualifications, and responsibilities  

• Number of available positions 
 

Departments may also request individual students for a position but there is no guarantee 

that the student can or will be placed. 

 

OFA maintains a Federal Work-Study Job Opportunities database of all available FWS jobs 

for undergraduates at the UM.  The OFA continually updates these postings as new requests 

are received.  All students who qualify for FWS are provided access to the job postings 

website through email announcement, by visiting the OFA, or via their myOleMiss Award 

Notification.  Students may also approach campus departments on their own to inquire 

about whether they would consider hiring a FWS student.   

 

Undergraduate students employed in regular FWS positions (i.e., not Family Literacy/Math 

Counts tutors) are paid bi-monthly at a rate of $7.40 per hour.  The hiring department is 

responsible for 25% of the wage. 

 

Students who secure FWS positions must complete a FWS placement form that they 

receive from the OFA. The form includes the following information: 

• Beginning/ending dates of employment 

• Total earning limits per Fall/Spring semesters (currently $1,000 each semester) 

• Total hours allowed to earn per semester (currently 135) 

• Suggested average per week hours per semester (currently 8) 

• Requirement for FWS supervisors to provide a job description  
 

Once the FWS placement form is completed and signed by both student and supervisor, the 

student returns the form to the OFA for processing the electronic form 18 (e-form), 

“Students Paid on an Hourly Basis” to establish the student’s payroll record through HR. 

The OFA maintains electronic (scanned) archive of all forms.  

 

 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/workstudyjobs1/


FWS Students as Tutors  

 

The Family Literacy Project is one possible FWS placement.  This program employs 

college students as reading or math tutors for children in local pre-K-12 schools and other 

non-profit educational service organizations. Students pursuing a tutor position must meet 

the following conditions in addition to the general FWS awarding criteria: 

• 2.5 GPA (for entering students, i.e. freshmen and transfer students, high school 
GPA or transfer GPA will be used to determine eligibility). 

• Willing to undergo a criminal background check (students authorize the background 
check by virtue of signing the Family Literacy Project application). 

 

Family Literacy tutors are paid $8.50 per hour (suggested average is 10 hours per week). A 

reasonable allowance for travel time is permitted if the student’s round-trip commute to and 

from the Family Literacy site is 8 minutes or more, not to exceed 30 minutes (round-trip 

commutes exceeding 30 minutes will be capped at 30 minutes only). Like regular FWS 

students, Family Literacy tutors are paid bi-monthly. 

 

FWS funding covers 100% of the cost of wages when students are:  

• Employed as a reading tutor for preschool-age through elementary school-
age children;  

• Employed as a mathematics tutor for children in elementary school through 
ninth grade; or 

• Performing family literacy activities in a family literacy project that 
provides services to families with preschool-age children or children who 

are in elementary school.   

 

Students interested in securing a Family Literacy tutor position must complete an 

application and have an interview with the Family Literacy Coordinator in the OFA. If 

approved for hire, the Family Literacy tutor will complete a FWS/Family Literacy 

placement form that they receive from the Family Literacy Coordinator in the OFA. The 

form includes the following information: 

• Beginning/ending dates of employment 

• Total earning limits per Fall/Spring semesters (currently $1,250 each semester) 

• Total hours allowed to earn per semester (currently 147) 

• Suggested average per week hours per semester (currently 10) 
 

Once the FWS/Family Literacy placement form is completed and signed by both student 

and the Family Literacy Coordinator, the OFA will process the electronic form 18 (e-form), 

“Students Paid on an Hourly Basis” to establish the student’s payroll record through HR. 

The OFA maintains electronic (scanned) archive of all forms.  

 



The information below appears on the FWS Family Literacy Project placement sheet (job 

description and qualifications):  

 

Students in the Family Literacy Project (America Reads/Math Counts) serve as reading and 

math tutors in local elementary, middle, and high schools, as well as some local 

educational service agencies. Responsibilities while on-site will only include tutoring 

students for reading and math under the direction of classroom teachers or supervisors. 

Students must be in good standing at The University of Mississippi, have excellent literary 

or mathematic skills, be willing to work approximately ten (10) hours per week and able to 

commit to working 3-4 hour blocks of time, have reliable transportation to travel to and 

from schools/agencies, and be willing to undergo a criminal background check.  

 

 

Graduate Students 

 

As noted above, graduate assistants receiving FWS are selected by authorized department.  

The students are typically majoring in that particular academic program. 

 

Off-campus agreements 

 

UM employs students in off-campus sites through the Family Literacy Project.  Each site 

where family literacy tutors are placed must sign an agreement between UM (Institution) 

and the school or local educational service agency (Organization).  The agreement includes 

information regarding the term of the agreement and specific responsibilities of the 

Institution and Organization.  The template for the current agreement is attached. 

 

Community Service  

 

Community services are defined as services that through formal or informal 

consultation with local nonprofit, government, and community-based organizations, 

as designed to improve the quality of life for community residents, particularly low-

income individuals, or to solve particular problems related to their needs.   

 

The OFA is required by federal regulation to spend a minimum of 7% of the 

institution’s FWS allocation on community service jobs each year, with at least one 

FWS student employed under the Family Literacy Project.  The OFA fulfills the 

community service obligation each year exclusively through the Family Literacy 

Project.   

 



Employment Conditions and Limitations 

 

Policies regarding any student employed by UM (including FWS students) are documented 

by HR (c.f., HR policy number 10000354, Policy Code HRO.EM.300.070), which includes 

the following limitations on the hours of work for student employees:  

 

Type of Student Max Amount of Hours 

All US Citizens or 

Permanent Resident 
25 hours per week 

International Student 

Employees on F-1 or J-1 

Student Visa 

20 hours per week 

 

 

 

 

Part 5.3 FWS Fiscal Procedures and Records 

 

Campus departments maintain timesheets for all FWS students in order to document the 

hours worked.  The supervisors are responsible for entering time electronically into the SAP 

system which is accessed by HR.  All payroll operations are conducted through HR.  As a 

result, FWS students receive their funding directly through paychecks; FWS funding is not 

posted to the Bursar account.   

 

The OFA will post actual wages as to the financial aid system following each pay period to 

ensure accurate monitoring of cumulative earned wages versus awarded amounts.   

Funds received under FWS are maintained by UM’s Office of Accounting. The OFA is also 

responsible for reporting FSW expenditures on the FISAP (the annual federal fiscal 

operations report) as confirmed by Accounting. 

 

FWS students are not paid through non-cash contributions, nor equipment.  

 

 

 

Part 5.4 Job Location and Development Program (JLD) Procedures and Records 

 

Administered by the Career Center, the JLD assists University of Mississippi students in 

finding jobs in the local community. Students do not have to show financial need to 

participate in this program.  Administration of the JLD program is paid through FWS funds 

up to $75,000 per year. 

 

 

 

Part 5.5 Work Colleges Program Procedures and Records 

 

The University of Mississippi does not participate in the Work Colleges Program. 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10648010


Federal Work-Study Placement Sheet 

 

STUDENT INSTRUCTIONS:  When you are hired, present this form to your supervisor to complete then return it to 

the Office of Financial Aid.  If you do not return this form and complete all paperwork you will not be paid! 

 

SUPERVISOR INSTRUCTIONS:  Please complete this form and keep a copy for your records.   

 

Student's Name                                        Supervisor’s Name                    

 

Student ID                                                Supervisor’s email                                                                                                                                                                                             

 

Student email                                             Supervisor’s phone                                                

 

Student phone   Department     

 

Hourly Rate     $7.40  (Cannot Change Rate)   Account #              

 

Start Date     Time Administrator #  

 

 

DEPARTMENTS PLEASE NOTE: Payment for work performed before or after the dates indicated above or 

made in excess of the FWSP award shown below, will be charged in total to the department. Students are not 

eligible to be paid as Work-Study students between Fall and Spring semesters. If you choose to terminate a 

student, or if a student chooses to resign, please notify The Office of Financial Aid immediately. 

 

This student’s FWSP awards for the periods indicated are: 

 

Amounts per Semester 
Maximum Hours 

per Semester 

Suggested Average Hours 

Per Week per Semester 

Fall Semester $1000 135 Fall Semester 8-10 

Spring Semester $1000 135 Spring Semester 8-10 

 

You must also complete the section below indicating the name of the position, actual work location, and a 

brief job description for this position (Please include work activities performed NOT just the job title in this 

section!): 

 

Name of position:   Actual work location:    

 

Job Description (include all work activities performed) 

 

 

 

 

I have read the above job description, and I understand and agree to the terms and conditions of my employment. I further 

understand that, in keeping with the University’s compliance with the Federal Affordable Care Act, I cannot exceed working a 

total of 25 hours per week, and if I do so, I understand I may be removed from my Federal Work-Study assignment. 

 

Student Signature:                                                                 Date:                                                       

 

I agree to supervise and maintain the Work-Study records of the above-named student. In keeping with the University’s 

compliance with the Federal Affordable Care Act, I further agree to ensure that the Work-Study student worker will not exceed 

working a total of 25 hours per week. I understand that Work-Study student workers may not work when scheduled to attend a 

class or other academic activity. I further understand that failure to comply with these requirements may mean additional 

financial liability for my department and/or the loss of Work-Study student workers. 

 

Supervisor Signature:                                                             Date:                                  

The student must return this completed form to the Office of Financial Aid before beginning work!                                                                                                                                                                              

Beginning Date of Employment Ending Date of Employment 

Fall 2018 08/20/2018 Fall 2018 12/07/2018 

Spring 2019 01/22/2019 Spring 2019 05/10/2019 



THE UNIVERSITY OF MISSISSIPPI 

Federal Work-Study Program 

Statement of Understanding 

 

 

I will fulfill, to the best of my abilities, my commitment to active Work-Study employment with the 

University of Mississippi.  I understand that I must be enrolled to participate in the Work-Study 

program. 

 

I understand that I am serving as a representative of the University of Mississippi in my role as a 

Work-Study employee. While on duty or involved in any activity associated with my employment, I 

shall conduct myself appropriately and dress in a suitable manner.  I realize that I can be terminated 

for any incident or behavior deemed inappropriate including but not limited to:  excessive tardiness, 

more than three unexcused absences, falsifying timesheets, use of drugs or alcohol in or near the 

workplace, coming to an assignment under the influence, theft, or the handling of a case not in 

accordance with University policy.  I agree that I may only obtain one placement as a Work-Study 

student worker during a single academic term.  I understand that my eligibility to participate as a 

Work-Study student worker is dependent upon submitting an accurate, valid Free Application for 

Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) for the appropriate aid year, and that it is my responsibility to meet 

Satisfactory Academic Progress or to receive financial aid probation status from the Office of 

Financial Aid in order to obtain federal financial aid (i.e. Federal Work-Study) for the academic 

term I am employed.  

 

I understand that during the course of my student employment, I may become aware of private, 

confidential, or other sensitive information. I hereby agree that I will neither access nor disclose 

such information regardless of the format except as necessary and appropriate in the course of the 

performance of my duties and responsibilities as an employee of the University of Mississippi. I 

understand that unauthorized use or disclosure of such information may subject me to disciplinary 

action up to and including termination of my employment and criminal proceedings. 

 

I understand that my department will work with me to set up my work schedule.  I agree to take the 

time to learn the rules of my department.  I shall be on time for my scheduled work time and I will 

contact my supervisor, in advance, if for some reason I am unable to attend work or will be running 

late.  I understand that I may only work when I am not scheduled to attend a class or other academic 

activity.   

 

I agree to complete all paperwork necessary for proper documentation of the time I worked in my 

department.  I understand that if my timesheet is not completed and submitted timely, accurately, 

and legibly as directed that I will not be paid on schedule.  Instead, the processing of my paycheck 

will be held until all issues are resolved and will then be submitted in a subsequent payroll cycle. I 

realize that I can only be paid for actual time worked. 

 

I am aware that I am welcome to bring questions and concerns to my 

supervisor.  In the event of any problem, I will report it immediately.  By 

signing below, I understand and agree to the conditions above. 

 

 

 

Signature: ________________________________________   Date:  ________________ 

 

Printed Name:  ___________________________________________________________ 



Federal Work-Study Placement Sheet Family Literacy 

(America Reads/Math Counts) 

 

STUDENT’S INSTRUCTIONS:  When you are hired, the Family Literacy Coordinator will complete and 

retain this form in the Office of Financial Aid.  This form must be completed or, you will not be 

paid! 

 

Student’s Name:                                                  Family Literacy Coordinator:   Nathan Payne 

 

Student's ID:                                        Department:      Family Literacy Project                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Student’s phone:                                   Account #:                                                                

Student’s e-mail:   Time Administrator #:            

Hourly Rate:     $8.50                                           START DATE:                            

Site Supervisor’s phone & email:        AID ID:                                                                                                                   

 

 

Semester Beginning Date of Employment Ending Date of Employment 

Fall 2018 08/20/2018 12/07/2018 

Spring 2019 01/22/2019 05/10/2019 

 

This students FWSP award for the periods indicated are: 

 

Suggested Maximum  

Amounts per Semester 

Hour Totals 

per Semester 

Suggested Average Hours 

per Week per Semester 

Fall Semester $1250 147 Fall Semester 10 

Spring Semester $1250 147 Spring Semester 10 

 

FAMILY LITERACY JOB DESCRIPTION/QUALIFICATIONS 

 

Students in The Family Literacy (America Reads/Math Counts) program serve as reading and math 

tutors in local elementary, middle, and high schools, as well as some local educational service 

agencies. Responsibilities while on site will only include tutoring students for reading and math 

under the direction of classroom teachers or supervisors. Students must be in good standing at The 

University of Mississippi, have excellent literary or mathematic skills, be willing to work 

approximately ten (10) hours per week and able to commit to working 3-4 hour blocks of time, have 

reliable transportation to travel to and from schools/agencies, and be willing to undergo a criminal 

background check. 

 

I have read the above job description, and I understand and agree to the terms and conditions of my 

employment. I further understand that, in keeping with the University’s compliance with the Federal Affordable 

Care Act, I cannot exceed working a total of 25 hours per week. I further understand that failure to comply with 

this requirement may mean my removal from my Family Literacy Program assignment.  

 

Student Signature:                                                                Date:   

 

I agree to supervise and maintain the work-study records of the above named Family Literacy student worker. In 

keeping with the University’s compliance with the Federal Affordable Care Act, I further agree to provide reports 

to the onsite supervisor to comply with the requirement that the work-study (Family Literacy) student worker will 

not exceed working a total of 25 hours per week.  

 

Family Literacy Coordinator Signature:                                                 Date:   

The student must return this completed form to the Office of Financial Aid before beginning work! 



Family Literacy Project 
Statement of Understanding 

 
I will fulfill, to the best of my ability, active participation in the Family Literacy Project. I have reliable 

personal transportation to make my assigned tutoring session. I understand the expectations and 

requirements of Family Literacy Project Tutors. 

 

I understand that I am serving as a representative of the University of Mississippi in my role as a Family 

Literacy tutor. While on duty or involved in any activity associated with the Family Literacy Project, I 

shall conduct myself appropriately and dress in a suitable manner. I realize that my employment may be 

terminated for any incident or behavior deemed inappropriate including but not limited to: excessive 

tardiness, more than three unexcused absences, falsifying timesheet information, the use of drugs, alcohol 

or tobacco products in or near a school, coming to my assigned school under the influence of drugs or 

alcohol, theft, inappropriate dress, or the handling of a case not in accordance with the philosophy of the 

program. 

 

I understand that I am required to submit a completed Family Literacy application, background check 

form, authorization to release personal information form, and all necessary payroll documents. I also 

understand all Family Literacy tutors are required to attend an Orientation and Training session. 

 

I will abide by each school’s own specified rules and work conduct codes. I shall be on time for my 

scheduled tutoring sessions and shall keep consistent, reliable hours for my sessions, knowing that the 

teacher(s) and students are depending on me. If I know in advance that I must miss an appointment, I will 

notify my teacher(s) and my supervisor as soon as possible. I understand that if my work schedule is 

greater than four hours and includes working through the “traditional” lunch break (11AM-2PM), I am 

required to take an unpaid 30-minute break and will sign out during this time on my family literacy time 

sheet. I am not allowed to work during my scheduled class times, and I understand that my class schedule 

will be checked to make sure that my work hours don’t conflict with my class times (this includes final 

exams).  

 

I agree to abide by the University of Mississippi’s Supervision of Minors Policy.  I understand I am 

required to report all reasonable suspicions of child abuse and/or neglect.  I understand I am required to 

report any violations of the Supervision of Minors Policy.  I understand I am prohibited from having one-

on-one contact with minors (see training materials for full details). I understand that I am prohibited from 

taking any photos while tutoring or on site. I also understand that I will not post any specific statements 

on social media about my site, assigned teacher(s), school counselor(s), or students at that site. 

 

I agree to abide by all University of Mississippi policies (www.olemiss.edu/policies).     

  

I agree to complete all necessary paperwork and documentation of the time I work at my assigned school. 

I will collect all required signatures, including teacher certifications of my hours worked. I understand 

that if my timesheet is not accurate, legible, and completed and submitted in a timely manner that I will 

not be paid on schedule. Instead, the processing of my paycheck will be held until all issues are resolved 

and will then be submitted in a subsequent payroll cycle. 

 

I am aware that I am welcome and invited to bring any questions or concerns I may have regarding the 

Family Literacy Project to my supervisor. In the event of any problem, I will report them to my 

supervisor as well.   

 

Signature:          Date:    



Family Literacy and Math Counts Agreement 
 
 

This agreement is entered into between The University of Mississippi, hereinafter known as 

the “Institution,” and the ABC Learning Center of Oxford, MS hereinafter known as the 

“Organization,” (a state public agency), for the purpose of providing work to students 

eligible for the Federal Work-Study [FWS] Program.  

 

Students will be made available to the Organization by the Institution to perform specific 

work assignments. Students may be removed from work on a particular assignment or from 

the Organization by the Institution, either on its own initiative or at the request of the 

Organization.  

 
In an effort to increase the reading and math proficiency of our nation’s children, 
tutoring in these areas has become a federal priority. The Federal Work-Study (FWS) 
regulations authorize a 100% federal share of FWS wages earned by a student who is 
employed:  

• As a reading tutor for preschool-age through elementary school-age children, OR 

• As a mathematics tutor for children in elementary school through ninth grade. 
 

Term of the Agreement 

This agreement is entered into and effective for the Institution’s 2018-19 academic year 

(August 20, 2018 through May 10, 2019). 

 

Transportation 

Transportation for students to and from their work assignments will not be provided by 

either the Institution or the Organization. 

 

Responsibilities of the Institution 

• The Institution is considered the employer for purposes of this agreement.  It has the 
ultimate right to control and direct the services of the students for the Organization.  

It is the final authority for determining whether the students are performing their 

work in accordance with Federal Work-Study policies. 

• The Institution will determine whether the students meet the eligibility requirements 
for employment under the Federal Work-Study Program, interview and provide 

orientation to the program, and will assign students to work for the Organization. 

• The Institution will process payroll for the students employed under this agreement.  
Student compensation for work performed on a project under this agreement will be 

disbursed under the appropriate federal or state Social Security laws.  All payments 

due as an employer’s contribution under state or local workers’ compensation laws, 

if any, are the obligation of the Institution.  

• The Institution will monitor hours worked for the employed students and provide 
reports to the Organization’s site supervisor to comply with the requirement that the 



student tutor will not exceed 25 hours per week. This is in keeping with the 

University’s compliance with the Federal Affordable Care Act. 

 

 

 

Responsibilities of the Organization 

• The Organization agrees to provide on-site supervision for students.  On-site 
supervisors must be professional, full-time, permanent employees of the 

Organization (teachers, counselors, and/or school administrators). 

• The Organization will ensure that students assigned under this agreement will 
provide tutoring services only. 

• The Organization will train tutors in the instructional practices they should use. 

• The Organization will maintain accurate and detailed time records.  For each payroll 
period, the Organization will furnish time reports to the Institution indicating the 

total hours worked each week in clock time sequence and containing the on-site 

supervisor’s certification as to the accuracy of the hours reported. The Organization 

further agrees not to allow any student tutor to exceed 25 hours per week. This is in 

keeping with the University’s compliance with the Federal Affordable Care Act. 

Student tutors who exceed these limits may be removed from their Family Literacy 

Project assignment. 

• The Organization will ensure that no student will be denied work or subjected to 
different treatment under this agreement on the grounds of race, color, national 

origin, or sex. It will comply with the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 

(Pub. L. 88-352; 78 Stat. 252) and Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 

(Pub. L. 92-318) and the Regulations of the Department of Education that 

implement those acts.  
================================================================================ 
 

Name of Institution   The University of Mississippi     

Address        Office of Financial Aid     

City, State, and Zip Code              257 Martindale      

          University, MS, 38677-1848    

Phone      662-915-5788      

Representative Name   Laura E. Diven-Brown, Director    

Signature            

 

Date                                             

Name of Agency/Organization           

 

Address            

 

City, State, and Zip Code           



Phone                 

Representative Name           

Signature            

 

Date                         

 
 

 

 

SCHEDULE A 

 

Descriptions of the work to be performed by students under this agreement 

Students will serve the local community by tutoring (1) pre-school through middle school 

students in reading OR (2) elementary school through ninth grade in mathematics. 

 

Qualifications of Students 

Applicants must be in good standing at Ole Miss and have a current FAFSA (Free 

Application for Federal Student Aid) on file that demonstrates financial need.  They must 

also have excellent literary or mathematic skills.  

 

Total number of students to be employed  

The number of assigned students will be determined based on the needs of the 

Organization. 

 

Compensation 

The pay rate has been set at $8.50 per hour by the Institution. 

 

Average number of hours per week each student will work  

Students will work 8-12 hours per week and commit to working 3-4 hour blocks of time (no 

more than 25 hours per week). 


