
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  3.6 Cost of Attendance (COA) Professional Judgments 
 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies and 
procedures for COA Professional Judgments. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply with 
administrative and regulatory requirements. All policies and procedures 
below are in accordance the Federal Student Aid Handbook. 

 
Policy Contents: 

    

3.6.A.   Cost of Attendance (COA) Overview 
3.6.A.1  Computer Purchase 
3.6.A.2  Dependent Child Care  

 3.6.A.3  Housing and Utilities  
 3.6.A.4  Travel Expenses  
 3.6.A.5  Wintersession Expense  
 3.6.A.6  Extraordinary Educational Expense 
 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 COA – Cost of Attendance 
 DOE – U.S. Department of Education 
 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 
 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 
 PJ – Professional Judgment 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Part 3.6.A Cost of Attendance Policies and Procedures Overview 

 

 
The OFA may increase a student’s COA to account for specific expenses the student will incur 
while attending the University that are beyond the standard cost allowances.  
 
For each of the items deemed as acceptable COA increases, the OFA will include this expense 
for students upon request and according to our existing policies. If approved, the student may be 
awarded available additional aid up to his/her COA, as determined by the OFA. 
 
*A Cost of Attendance increase does NOT automatically guarantee that additional aid will be 
awarded. 
 
Definition of Cost of Attendance: 

 
Financial aid is awarded based on an average COA that includes appropriate tuition/fees for the 
educational program as well as allowances for books/supplies and living expenses (which can 
include housing, meals, personal and travel costs).  These expenses can cover the student’s actual 
period of enrollment only.  
 
The University’s current COA estimate is available at: https://finaid.olemiss.edu/cost-of-
attendance/  
 
Cost of Attendance Increase Professional Judgments Include: 
 

• Computer Purchase 
• Dependent Child Care 
• Rent and Utilities 
• Travel Expenses 
• Wintersession Expense 
• Extraordinary Educational Expense 

 
Correspondence: 

 
Please note that all correspondence from the OFA will be carried out through email. Therefore, 
the student is responsible for checking his or her Ole Miss email account regularly. If the student 
does not use their Ole Miss account, it is recommended that he or she forward it to an active 
email account. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Part 3.6.A.1 Computer Purchase 

 
 
The DOE permits institutions of higher education to include in a student’s COA the purchase of 
a computer for educational use.  

 

• The COA increase for the purchase of the computer will be equal to the actual cost of the 
computer but no more than a maximum of $3,000, which may include the cost of a 
printer. Software will not be considered applicable to this increase. If the student plans to 
use Mississippi Excellence in Teaching Program (METP) funds, the maximum increase 
to the COA is $1,000.  

 

• A student may receive this increase only once as an undergraduate and once as a graduate 
student.  

 

• Additional purchases of software, printer supplies, online service fees etc. will be 
assumed to be covered under the allowances already included in the COA for books and 
supplies.  

 
Computer Purchase Documentation Submission Requirements: 

 
In order to request that the cost of the purchase of a computer is added to the student’s COA, the 
student must provide a dated receipt/proof of purchase OR a dated, itemized estimate of the cost 
of the proposed purchase. 
 
If the student is using METP funds, he or she must submit the dated receipt/proof of purchase.  
Per the funding source, the OFA cannot accept an estimate of the proposed purchase in this case. 
 
In order to initiate the Computer Purchase Professional Judgment review process, the student 
must complete the corresponding form and provide it in addition to the required documentation 
as listed. 
 
The Computer Purchase Professional Judgment form is available at: 
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/pj_computerpurchase/.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Part 3.6.A.2 Dependent Child Care 

 
 
The OFA may approve a COA increase for students who must incur additional expenses for 
dependent child care.  
 
The period for which dependent care is required includes, but is not limited to:  
 

• Class time 
• Study time 
• Field work 
• Internships 
• Commuting time 
 

A request form must be submitted for each new academic year. The student should be registered 
for classes before submitting this form. The amount of the COA increase is capped according to 
the results of on an annual survey conducted by the OFA to identify the prevailing rate (per 
child) for dependent care in the local community (per federal regulation).  This rate is noted on 
the request form each year.  
 
If the student is married, or if both parents of the dependent(s) are living together, it is typically 
assumed that child care costs must be divided equally between both parents. Only independent 
students are eligible for this increase. 
 
When reviewing a COA increase request for dependent child care, the OFA reserves the right to 
contact the childcare provider, as well as to request additional documentation including, but not 
limited to: 
 

• A written statement and/or printed receipts for services rendered from the designated 
childcare provider; 

• The student’s current class schedule; 
• Spouse’s enrollment status and/or employment status (if applicable)  

 
Dependent Child Care Documentation Submission Requirements: 

 
In order to initiate the Dependent Child Care Professional Judgment review process, the student 
must complete the corresponding form and provide it in addition to the required documentation 
as listed. 
 
The Child Care Professional Judgment form is available at: 
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/pj_childcare/  
 
The student must also provide the birth certificate of each dependent listed.  
 
 
 



 

Part 3.6.A.3 Housing and Utilities 

 
 
The OFA may approve increases for documented housing costs as well as utilities. 
 
As DOE guidelines stipulate that housing/utility cost considerations must be “modest but 
adequate,” annual caps are established each year for this type of increase.  Costs other than those 
listed below (i.e., insurance.) will not be considered. 
 

• Rent/Mortgage 
• Phone  
• Natural Gas 
• Water/Sewer 
• Electric 
• Garbage  
• Cable/Satellite 

• Internet 
 
Rent and Utilities Documentation Submission Requirements: 

 
In order to request that the cost of housing and utilities expenses above those already included in 
the standard COA be added, the student must complete the corresponding form and provide it in 
addition to the required documentation as listed.  
 
The Rent and Utilities Professional Judgment form is available at: 
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/pj_rentutilities/  
 
Additional required information:  

 

The student must report the amounts of each monthly expense, which include only the base, 
monthly cost(s), and do not include late fees, connection costs and/or deposits. Each cost must be 
clearly documented—the student should attach an updated copy of his/her lease or mortgage 
statement and most recent utility bills (i.e., gas, electric, cable, phone, water/sewer, garbage and 
internet). Only documented housing and utility costs will be considered.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

Part 3.6.A.4 Travel Expenses 

 
 
The OFA may approve a COA increase for students who must incur additional travel expenses 
during the semester. The student may be eligible for this type of increase if he or she meets at 
least one of the following criteria:  
 

(A) The student lives full-time in a town or city other than Oxford, MS (or the location 
of the student’s satellite campus), AND the student commutes to the campus at least 
one day per week for classes. 

 
OR 

 

(B) The student is a non-resident student with a permanent address on record with 
the University that is greater than three hundred fourteen (314) miles from 

Oxford, MS (or the location of the student’s satellite campus).  Since UM is a public 
state institution, the standard of “314 miles” is utilized because it is the distance to 
Biloxi, the furthest city from Oxford within Mississippi.  Therefore, the regular travel 
allowance covers all state residents (and without requiring them to request increases). 

 
The OFA will determine the student’s proximity to the University by calculating the distance 
between his or her provided mailing address and the campus at which the student is enrolled.  
 
For non-resident students who live outside of the region drawn by the 314 mile radius, some cost 
determinations will be based on car travel.  In other cases, it may not be realistic to assume that a 
student would be driving from UM to a distant home permanent address, so other reasonable 
methods to account for appropriate costs (such as plane fare estimates) will be utilized.  The 
OFA reserves the right to interview the student or request additional documentation if additional 
information is needed.  
 
Travel Expenses Documentation Submission Requirements: 

 
In order to request an increase to the student’s Cost of Attendance for extraordinary travel and/or 
commuting expenses above the standard travel allotment, the student must submit the 
corresponding form and provide it in addition to the required documentation as listed. 
 
The Travel Expenses Professional Judgment form is available at: 
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/pj_travelexpenses/ 
 
Budgetary increases can only be considered for one term at a time, since class schedules may 
vary. 
 
 
 
 



 

Part 3.6.A.5 Wintersession Expense 

 
 
The OFA may approve a COA increase for students who must incur additional expenses for 
Wintersession course(s). 
 
Please note the following: 
 

• Wintersession is considered part of the Spring term for financial aid purposes. 
 

• The OFA cannot process additional aid for Wintersession expenses until the student is 
officially enrolled in Wintersession course(s) as indicated in their myOleMiss web portal. 

 

• The OFA will conduct a review of the student’s enrollment status prior to any Spring 
financial aid disbursement. 
 

• Because housing and food allowances in the COA already account for the combined 
Winter/Spring term (e.g. Ole Miss Student Housing does not charge additional fees for 
Wintersession), generally only the cost of tuition/fees and books/supplies will be added 
for Wintersession via this request.  (Study Abroad classes are an exception.) 

 

• If a Wintersession course is dropped within the refund period, the COA increase will be 
removed and financial aid paybacks may be incurred. 

 
 

Wintersession Expense Documentation Submission Requirements: 

 
In order to request special consideration for additional aid in order to meet the additional 
expenses incurred while attending Wintersession, the student must submit the corresponding 
form and provide it in addition to the required documentation as listed. 
 
The Wintersession Expense Professional Judgment form is available at: 
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/pj_wintersession/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 

Part 3.6.A.6 Extraordinary Educational Expense 

 
 
The DOE permits institutions of higher education to increase a student’s COA due to additional 
expenses deemed required for programs of study. Below are examples of acceptable and 
unacceptable expenses. 
 
Acceptable Expenses: 

 
1. An allowance for the one-time direct costs of obtaining a first professional license or 

certificate for students enrolled in a program that requires such professional licensure or 
certification (e.g. Praxis test fees, bar exam fees, etc.). The cost must be incurred during a 
period of enrollment. 

2. An allowance for expenses related to a student’s disability (e.g. personal assistance, 
transportation, equipment/supplies, etc.).  

3. An allowance for expenses directly related to educational research that is required for a 
degree program.  (The student must provide written verification from the instructor or 
dean of the academic department that this expense is required for the student’s program 
of study). 

 
Unacceptable Expenses: 

 
1. An allowance for test/exam prep courses (e.g., bar exam reviews, CPA exam reviews). 
2. An allowance for attending a professional conference, even if the student is presenting. 
3. An allowance for any component already included in the student’s COA. 

 
Any course-related expense(s) must be for a class that counts towards your degree requirements.  
 
Budgetary increases can only be considered for one term at a time. 
 
 
Extraordinary Educational Expense Documentation Submission Requirements: 

 
In order to add the cost of extraordinary educational expenses to the student’s COA, the student 
must submit the corresponding form and supporting documentation. 
 
The Extraordinary Educational Expense Professional Judgment form is available at:  
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/pj_extraeduexpense/  
   


