
  

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  TEACH Grant (Federal Teacher Education Assistance for College 

and Higher Education Grant) 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for the TEACH Grant. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements. All policies and 

procedures below are in accordance with the Federal Student Aid 

Handbook. 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

   9.0   TEACH Grant Overview 

9.0.1  Approved Subject Areas 

9.0.2  Highly-Qualified Teacher 

9.0.3  Full-Time Teacher 

9.0.4  TEACH Grant Agreement to Serve 

9.0.5  TEACH Grant Repayment 

   9.1  Eligibility Determination 

9.1.1  Award Amount 

   9.2   Counseling 

   9.3  Fiscal Control and Fund Accounting 

 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

TEACH Grant – Federal Teacher Education Assistance for College and Higher  

               Education Grant 

 

 

 

https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1617FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.html
https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1617FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.html


Part 9.0 TEACH Grant Overview 

 

The TEACH program awards grants to students who intend to pursue a teaching career in 

a high-need field.  In exchange for the grant, the student must agree to serve as a full-time 

“Highly Qualified” teacher in a school serving low-income students for at least four 

academic years within eight years of completing (or otherwise ceasing to be enrolled in) 

the program of study for which the student received the grant.  If the student does not 

satisfy the service obligation, the amounts of the TEACH Grants received are treated as a 

Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan and must be repaid with interest.   

 

 

Correspondence: 

 

Please note that all correspondence from the OFA will be carried out through email. 

Therefore, the student is responsible for checking his or her Ole Miss email account   

regularly. If the student does not use their Ole Miss account, it is recommended that he or 

she forward it to an active email account. 

 

 

Part 9.0.1 Approved Subject Areas 

 

The items listed below are approved high-need subject areas for TEACH grant recipients: 

 Mathematics 

 Science 

 Foreign Language 

 Bilingual Education 

 Special Education 

 As a reading specialist 

 Another field documented as high-need by the Federal government, a State 

government, or a Local Education Agency, and approved by the Secretary of 

Education. This field must be listed in the Department of Education’s annual 

Teacher Shortage Area Nationwide Listing at: 

https://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ope/pol/tsa.doc  

 

 

Part 9.0.2 Highly-Qualified Teacher 

 

The student must perform the teaching service as a highly-qualified teacher, which is 

defined in federal law. The informational sheet can also be found online at: 

https://www2.ed.gov/policy/elsec/leg/esea02/pg107.html.  

 

 

 

 

 

https://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ope/pol/tsa.doc
https://www2.ed.gov/policy/elsec/leg/esea02/pg107.html


Part 9.0.3 Full-Time Teacher 

 

The student must meet the state’s definition of a full-time teacher and spend the majority 

(at least 51 percent) of his or her time teaching one of the high-need subject areas (as 

listed in 9.0.1). Elementary school teachers who teach many subjects would not be able to 

fulfill their service agreement. 

 

 

 

Part 9.0.4 TEACH Grant Agreement to Serve 

 

Each year the student receives a TEACH Grant, he or she must sign a TEACH Grant 

Agreement to Serve. The Agreement is a legally binding document that defines the 

teaching obligations the student must meet and specifies his or her repayment obligation 

if a TEACH Grant that the student receives is converted to a Federal Direct Unsubsidized 

Loan. When the student signs the service agreement, he or she is agreeing to repay the 

TEACH Grant as a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan, with interest accrued from the 

date that the TEACH Grant funds were disbursed, if the student does not complete the 

teaching obligation. Once the TEACH Grant has been converted to a loan, it cannot be 

converted back to a grant. 

 

 

 

Part 9.0.5 TEACH Grant Repayment 

 

The TEACH Grant must be repaid as a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan, with interest 

added to the loan calculated from the date the TEACH Grant funds were originally 

disbursed, if the student does not teach for at least four years within eight years of 

completing the program under the following conditions: 

 As a Highly Qualified Teacher (see 9.0.2) 

 In a public or private elementary or secondary school that serves low-income 

students. The current listing of schools by state can be found at: 

https://www.tcli.ed.gov/CBSWebApp/tcli/TCLIPubSchoolSearch.jsp. (Note that 

not all states have posted current year information. If no results are found, please 

reference the prior year.) 

 In a specified high-need subject area (as listed in 9.0.1)  

https://www.tcli.ed.gov/CBSWebApp/tcli/TCLIPubSchoolSearch.jsp


 

Part 9.1 Eligibility Determination 

 

To receive the TEACH Grant each academic year, a student must: 

 Be a U.S. citizen or eligible non-citizen 

 Be enrolled in a degree program at either the undergraduate or graduate level 

(undergraduates must qualify for admission to Phase II of the Teacher Education 

Program, usually at the junior or senior years only – refer to the UM School of 

Education for requirements) 

 Receive a GPA of at least a 3.25 for each payment period  

o From high school for first year students 

o From college for other students 

o OR score above the 75th percentile on an admissions test, such as SAT, 

ACT, or GRE 

 Complete coursework necessary to begin a career in teaching, or plan to complete 

coursework necessary to begin a career in teaching. 

Demonstration of financial need is not required. 

 

Students must complete the Request for Federal TEACH Grant and submit the form to 

the OFA.  The form can be printed from this website: https://finaid.olemiss.edu/teach-

grants/.  

 

Part 9.1.1 Award Amount 

The TEACH Grant will provide up to $4,000 per year for the first undergraduate 

program. Students cannot receive more than $16,000 total.  

Graduate students can receive up to $4,000 per year with a limit of $8,000. 

This award in combination with all other financial aid cannot exceed a student’s cost of 

attendance. 

Due to the impact of Federal Sequestration, award amounts for any TEACH Grant is 

described below: 

 TEACH Grants that are first disbursed on or after Oct. 1, 2018, and before Oct. 1, 
2019, must be reduced by 6.2 percent from the award amount for which a 

recipient would otherwise have been eligible. For examples, the maximum award 

of $4,000 is reduced by $248, resulting in a maximum award of $3,752.  

 

 TEACH Grants that are first disbursed on or after Oct. 1, 2019, and before Oct. 1, 
2020, must be reduced by 5.9 percent from the award amount for which a 

recipient would otherwise have been eligible. For example, the maximum award 

of $4,000 is reduced by $236, resulting in a maximum award amount of $3,764.  

http://education.olemiss.edu/safe/admission.html
http://education.olemiss.edu/safe/admission.html
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/teach-grants/
https://finaid.olemiss.edu/teach-grants/


When a disbursement is made to the bursar account, students are notified by email.  Since 

the TEACH Grant can become a loan, unless the student meets the service obligation, 

students are informed via email of their right to cancel all or a portion of their award at 

any time within 14 days of disbursement.  To exercise this right, they must contact the 

OFA in writing.  Although cancellation may be possible after 14 days, UM cannot 

process a loan cancellation if more than 120 days have lapsed since disbursement.  In 

addition, unless the funds are paid back to UM by the borrower, the school is not required 

to return any portion of a loan that was delivered as a refund to the student or parent as a 

result of a credit balance. 

 

 

Part 9.2 Counseling 

 

Students receiving the TEACH Grant will be required to complete initial and subsequent 

counseling prior to signing the Agreement to Serve and prior to the TEACH Grant 

disbursing to the students bursar account.    

 

The counseling sessions will explain the service obligation as well as the conversion of 

the TEACH Grant to an unsubsidized loan in the case of the student not meeting the 

service requirement. Counseling will be completed online at: https://teach-

ats.ed.gov/ats/studentHome.action.   

 

Exit counseling is also required.  The OFA will identify TEACH Grant recipients who 

cease attendance by comparing data on the National Student Loan Clearinghouse 

enrollment files.  In addition, the OFA will ask the Registrar’s Office to provide lists of 

students who have applied for graduation for May, August, or December to match them 

against the TEACH Grant roster. The OFA will then notify the appropriate students via 

their Ole Miss email and the email address on the student’s FAFSA about the 

requirement to complete TEACH Grant Exit Counseling. 

 

 

Part 9.3 Fiscal Control and Fund Accounting 

 

The OFA is responsible for reporting individual TEACH Grant awards to the Common 

Origination & Disbursement system. The Accounting Office is responsible for the 

drawdown of funds for this program.   

 

 

 

 

https://teach-ats.ed.gov/ats/studentHome.action
https://teach-ats.ed.gov/ats/studentHome.action

