
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  3.7B  Death of a Student 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for resolving financial aid issues following 

the death of a student. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

Policy Contents: 

    

3.7.B   Death of a Student Overview 

3.7.B.1   Title IV Loan Debt Cancellation after Death of a Student 

3.7.B.2 Deceased Student Credit Balance (after Return Calculation) 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

R2T4 – Return of Title IV Funds 

UM – University of Mississippi  



 

Part 3.7.B Office of Financial Aid Policy for Death of a Student Overview 

 

Special rules apply when students cease attendance after receiving student financial aid 

for the term from any of the following programs: 

 

 Federal Pell Grant 

 Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grant 

 Federal Supplemental Education Opportunity Grant (SEOG) 

 TEACH Grant 

 Federal Direct Subsidized and/or Unsubsidized Loan 

 Federal Graduate PLUS Loan (for graduate/professional students) 

 Federal PLUS Loan (undergraduate) 
 

This requirement applies to students who pass away as well as those who completely 

withdraw. 

 

Per federal regulations, the OFA must determine how much of the Title IV funding listed 

above was “earned” by the student based on the actual length of his/her time enrolled 

before attendance ceased.  Any “unearned” funding must be paid back.  This 

determination is made by performing a R2T4 calculation.  Please see policy 3.2 Return of 

Title IV Funds. 

 

 

Part 3.7.B.1 Title IV Loan Debt Cancellation after Student Death 

 

Regulations governing the federal loan programs provide for a discharge of a borrower’s 

obligation to repay a Federal Direct Loan (or any outstanding balance still owed for funds 

borrowed under the now-suspended Federal Perkins Loan program) in the event of a 

student’s death. These provisions also cover the obligation of a PLUS loan borrower who 

has borrowed on behalf of a student who is now deceased. 

 

Representatives from the student’s estate are encouraged to contact the holder of the 

loan(s) or the OFA for information regarding the actions required to cancel any Title IV 

loan debt. 

 

 

Part 3.7.B.2 Deceased Student Credit Balance (after Return Calculation) 

 

UM will typically reverse tuition and fee charges following the death of a student.  Once 

this transaction is completed and R2T4 paybacks are posted (if applicable), any 

remaining credit balance on the Bursar account will be disposed of in the following order: 

 

1. Return to the family any funds that they paid out-of-pocket (even if the account 
receivable shows a balance due, because the Bursar will write this amount off). 

https://policies.olemiss.edu/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=11308920&accessPara=full
https://policies.olemiss.edu/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=11308920&accessPara=full


 

2. Credit back institutional scholarships to their accounts (up to the amount of the 
scholarship award OR the remaining credit balance, whichever is less). 

 

3. Credit back institutional loans to their accounts (up to the amount of the loan 
award OR the remaining credit balance, whichever is less). 

 

4. Credit back federal funds to their sources (up to the amount of the award OR 
the remaining credit balance, whichever is less). 

 

5. Credit back any other outside funds (except for state grants). 
 

6. Return state grant funds to the state financial aid office (up to the amount of the 
grant award OR the remaining credit balance, whichever is less). 

 


