
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  Federal Perkins Loans Program 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for the Federal Perkins Loan. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements. All policies and 

procedures below are in accordance with the Federal Student Aid 

Handbook. 

 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

4.0  Federal Perkins Loan Overview 

4.1   Selection and Awarding of Students 

4.2  Perkins Master Promissory Note (MPN) 

4.3  Perkins Loan Program Termination 

  

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

EFC – Expected Family Contribution 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 MPN – Master Promissory Note 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 

  

https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1617FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.html
https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1617FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.html


 

Part 4.0 Federal Perkins Loan Overview 

 

Note that the Federal Perkins Loan was indefinitely suspended on September 30, 

2017 and is no longer a funding option.  OFA cannot make any new loans.  

 

The Federal Perkins Loan is a low-interest, long-term loan made to undergraduate 

students who demonstrate financial need in order to help pay for their cost of education.  

Although Perkins is a federal loan (which has been supplemented by an institutional 

match), UM is responsible for administering the loan program on our campus.  Students 

repay their Perkins loan obligation directly to UM (and/or UM’s loan servicing partner). 

The maximum amount an undergraduate student may borrow is $5,500 per award year. 

Loans may also be available in the summer based on the level of remaining funds.  The 

loan carries a fixed interest rate of 5% and has no origination or guarantee fees.  

Interest does not accrue on the loan for the student during: 

 Periods of deferment (including enrollment at least half-time in college or career 

school, active duty military service, etc.) 

 The nine-month grace period after the student ceases attendance on at least a half-

time basis. 

Perkins aggregate loan limits: 

 $11,000 for any student who has not completed two academic years of 
undergraduate work. 

 $27,500 for an undergraduate student who has completed two academic years and 
is pursuing a bachelor’s degree. 

 $60,000 for a graduate or professional student, including loans borrowed as an 
undergraduate student. 

Repayment of Perkins loans does not begin until the student graduates or drops below 

half-time status.  In cases of economic hardship, payments may be deferred, extended, or 

reduced.  The loan is forgiven in cases of permanent disability or death.  The student may 

be allowed up to 10 years to repay the Perkins Loan.  

Certain professions and public service activities may qualify the borrower for future loan 

cancellation (including service in teaching, the Peace Corps, law enforcement, and 

nursing.)  Perkins loans may also be consolidated with Federal Direct Loans for 

repayment purposes. 

  



 

Part 4.1 Selection and Awarding of Students 

 

The OFA determines a student’s Perkins loan eligibility based on information provided 

on the student’s most recent FAFSA (see policy “2.0 Student Eligibility for Federal 

Aid”).   Because Perkins loan funds are limited, it is recommended that students submit 

the FAFSA as early as possible to ensure full consideration.    

 

Federal criteria requires an eligible Perkins loan receipient to: 

 Be undergraduate students. 

 Be United States citizens or eligible non-citizens. 

 Not be in default of any federal student loan. 

 Not have a Federal Pell Grant overpayment. 

 Have a procesed FAFSA on file with the OFA. 

 Demonstrate financial need.   

 Be making Satisfactory Academic Progress (see policy “1.2 Satisfactory 
Academic Progress”). 

 Have Direct Loan eligibility amounts included in the calculation of undergraduate 
student’s Perkins Loan amount, regardless of whether they actually borrow that 

full amount: 

o For newly eligible undergraduate students:  be offered all Direct 
Subsidized and Unsubsidized Loan aid for which the student is eligible, 

o For current Perkins recipients:  be offered all Direct Subsidized Loan aid 
for which the student is eligible. 

 

In addition, OFA is responsible for providing the following information to each student 

awarded (see also an example of Federal Perkins Loan Program Disclosures document 

included at the end of this policy): 

 Notice and explanation regarding the end to future availability of loans from the 
Federal Perkins Loan program. 

 Notice and explanation that repayment and forgiveness benefits available to 
Federal Direct Loan borrowers are not available to Federal Perkins Loan 

Borrowers. 

 Notice and explanation regarding a Federal Perkins Loan borrower’s option to 
consolidate a Federal Perkins loan into a Federal Direct Consolidated Loan, 

including any benefit of consolidation. 

 For current undergraduate borrowers AND/OR for new undergraduate borrowers, 
a notice and explanation providing a comparison of the interest rates of Perkins 

Loan and Direct Loans, and informing the borrower that the borrower has reached 

the maximum annual borrowing limit for Direct Subsidized Loans (and Direct 

Unsubsidized, if applicable) for which the borrower is eligible. 

 

  

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647680
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647680
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_citizen
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Default_%28finance%29
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Pell_Grant
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647754
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10647754


Loans are issued for a single academic year or semester, and both eligibility and amount 

are re-determined annually throughout the student’s academic career.  Generally, to 

determine the amount of each disbursement, the award amount is divided by the number 

of payment periods a student will attend.  However, if a student incurs uneven costs or 

receives uneven resourses during the year and needs extra funds in a particular payment 

period, OFA may disburse additional Perkins amounts to the student in whatever manner 

best meets the student’s needs.      

 

Students who demonstrate exceptional financial need will be given priority during the 

Perkins awarding process.  For this purpose, OFA defines exceptional financial need as 

any student with an EFC equal to or less than $3000.  Undergraduates are packaged 

automatically for Fall/Spring on this basis until the allotted funds are exhausted.  The 

typical annual award is $2,000 for Fall/Spring (or $1,000 per semester).  These amounts 

can only be manually increased with the permission of an OFA supervisor on a case-by-

case basis.   

 

In addition, undergraduate students may be awarded manually upon request following a 

determination by a financial aid advisor that they are experiencing financial hardships or 

obstacles.  They must demonstrate financial need for the award.   

 

 

Summer Awarding  

 

Summer Perkins loans can be awarded to students who complete the Summer Financial 

Aid Application.  Since summer is considered a trailer to the award year, the remaining 

Perkins funds are typically limited and may be exhausted.  Therefore, Summer Perkins 

awarding criteria above the federal requirements varies with each aid year.  As with 

Fall/Spring awarding, Summer students can also be manually awarded Perkins on a case-

by-case basis.  

 

 

Part 4.2 Perkins Master Promissory Note (MPN) 

Before the Federal Perkins Loan can disburse, the student must complete all of the 

following actions (in addition to maintaining eligibility for the award): 

1. Accept all or a part of the financial aid package by accessing their individual 
“Financial Aid Notification” online in the student’s MyOleMiss portal. 

 

2. Complete Perkins Loan Entrance Counseling online at Ole Miss Online Entrance 
Counseling (or request alternate counseling options from the OFA).  Financial aid 

advisors are available during regular business hours to answer questions at the 

completion of the counseling session. 

  

http://mappingyourfuture.org/oslc/counseling/SchoolPages.cfm?SchoolPageID=8070&SchoolID=261
http://mappingyourfuture.org/oslc/counseling/SchoolPages.cfm?SchoolPageID=8070&SchoolID=261


 

3. Print the Perkins Loan Contract (MPN), which is presented electronically through 
the student’s “Financial Aid Award Notification” in MyOleMiss.  (If the student 

wishes to process via paper correspondence only, the MPN can be mailed to them 

upon request.) 

 

4. Submit the completed MPN by mail or in person to the Bursar’s Office (202 
Martindale, P.O. Box 1848, University, MS 38677).  Contracts must be original 

signed documents and cannot be faxed or scanned. 

 

5. The Perkins Loan must have been awarded prior to the end of a term in order to 
be eligible for disbursement. 

 

For information about the borrower’s rights and responsibilities, please refer to 

http://finaid.olemiss.e du/borrowers-rights-and-responsibilities/. 

  

The Bursar’s Office handles loan servicing on behalf of UM, including Perkins loan exit 

counseling.  Students may consult the Bursar’s office for specific polices and procedures 

regarding the process for handling forebearance or deferment requests, reviewing 

continued eligibility for deferment on an annual basis, contact with borrowers, billing, 

collection, litigation, and cancellation. 

 

 

Part 4.3 Perkins Loan Program Termination 

 

The Federal Perkins Loan program was indefinitely suspensed on September 30, 2017. 

Students awarded Perkins loans for the 2017-18 academic year must have first 

disbursements paid prior to October 1, 2017 in order to receive subsequent (i.e., spring 

2017-18) disbursements.  As a result, authority to award new Perkins loans was 

suspended as of October 1, 2017.  

  

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/borrowers-rights-and-responsibilities/


SAMPLE OF FEDERAL PERKINS LOAN DISCLOSURE STATEMENT:  



  



 


