
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 3 
 

Policy for Proctored Assessments in Online Education 
 
The primary purpose of this document is to acquaint University of Mississippi faculty with 

their obligations and resources related to proctored assessments in online education. This 

policy does not apply to online courses offered by the Office of iStudy or the University of 

Mississippi High School.  

Policy 

Assessments at the university can be accomplished through various means depending on 

the requirements of the instructor, the academic program, and the university.  Proctored 

assessments are encouraged as a means of student authentication. 

 

Faculty will follow guidelines set forth by the Schools or the College, if such exist, in which 

their course is offered concerning required proctored assessments. 

University of Mississippi Approved Proctors 

The University of Mississippi offers the following options for proctoring an assessment.  

Alternate proctoring methods must be approved by the Office of Online Design & 

eLearning. 

 

1. UM Campus Proctor 

a. Instructors may administer and monitor assessments in their courses or 

b. They may utilize proctoring services through the Distance Education Testing 

Lab (DETL) in Oxford, or 

c. They may utilize proctoring services at any regional campus, including 

Southaven, Tupelo, Booneville and Grenada. 

 
2. Online Proctoring Center   

a. Instructors may select to use any internet-based proctoring service that is 

approved by the Office of Online Design & eLearning. 

b. All approved internet-based proctoring services will meet the standards for 

identity and privacy rights outlined in UM’s Policy for Student Information 

and Privacy in Online Education 

 
3. Other Options for Instructors  

a. Instructors have the option of utilizing face-to-face proctors for their 

course(s) or students(s).    

b. If they select this option then the instructor is responsible for verifying that 

the proctor (1) is a member of a nationally certified testing association, or  

(2) that the proctor meets the standards for identity and privacy rights 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 3 
 

outlined in UM’s Policy for Student Information and Privacy in Online 

Education. 

            

Costs and Notification 

Students must be notified at the time of registration or enrollment of any projected costs 

associated with verification of student identity (e.g., costs associated with online 

proctoring). 

 
Students are responsible for any costs associated with using a proctoring service. 
 

Compliance 

Instructors and students must adhere to the procedures of the University of Mississippi 

proctoring centers and the Academic Policies, Standards and Regulations for Academic 

Conduct and Discipline outlined in the University of Mississippi M-Book.  

Students who are non-compliant with these standards will be required to immediately 

submit the examination and will be dismissed from the proctoring center. The instructor 

will also be alerted regarding any non-compliance issues. 

Students with Special Needs 

In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, students with bona fide disabilities 

will be afforded reasonable accommodation in online classes.  The Office of Student 

Disability Services will certify a disability and advise faculty members of reasonable 

accommodations.  See the Office of Student Disabilities for more information. 

 

Definitions 

Non-Proctored Assessments or Deliverables 

Examples of non-proctored assessments or deliverables are projects or journals, 
take-home exams, quizzes, term papers, or discussion boards. 
 
These assessments are administered without a proctor and allow for students to 
complete assessments at a location of their convenience and within a time frame 
specified by the instructor. 
 

Proctored Assessments 

Proctored assessments are managed by a person or service that administers and 
monitors assessments.  A proctor or proctoring service has the responsibility of 
verifying the identity of the test taker, ensuring appropriate conditions are met, and 
monitoring the actual assessments. 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 3 of 3 
 

 
Proctored assessments may be administered by the instructor or by approved 
proctors. 

 


