
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

Policy Name:  FAFSA Processing 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for loading Free Application for Federal 

Student Aid (FAFSA) data submitted by students. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  All policies and 

procedures below are in accordance with the Federal Student Aid 

Handbook. 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

12.0   FAFSA Load Overview 

12.1  FAFSA Load Requirements and Procedures  

12.2  Detecting and Resolving Issues Preventing FAFSA Loads 

12.3  Subsequent FAFSA Loads 

   

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 CPS – Central Processing System 

 DOB – Date of Birth 

 EFC – Expected Family Contribution  

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

FSEOG – Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant 

ISIR – Institutional Student Information Record (processed FAFSA) 

 NSLDS – National Student Loan Data System  

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 ProSAM – OFA database system 

 SSN – Social Security Number 

 TEACH – Teacher Education Assistance for College and Higher Education 

https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1617FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.html
https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1617FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.html


 

Part 12.0 FAFSA Load Overview 

 

Each year, students apply for Federal Title IV aid (Federal Pell Grant, Iraq & Afghanistan 

Service Grant, FSEOG, TEACH, Federal Work-Study, Direct Loans, and PLUS loans), 

as well as need-based state and institutional aid, using the FAFSA.  This application is 

available to both undergraduate and graduate/professional students at www.fafsa.gov.  It 

must be submitted annually to the U.S. Department of Education’s CPS (the application 

opens October 1 each year). 

 

Students choose which institutions of higher learning can access their processed FAFSA 

data by providing the appropriate school codes when they apply.  UM receives 

applications electronically and stores the information in its financial aid database, 

ProSAM (a Sigma Systems product).  Each record contains the student’s responses to all 

FAFSA items, as well as key processing results and the student’s financial aid history (as 

maintained by NSLDS).  

 

The OFA works to detect and resolve issues that prevent FAFSAs from loading by 

instructing students to correct erroneous FAFSA information, or by making revisions 

administratively to a student’s FAFSA when appropriate. 

 

 

Part 12.1 FAFSA Load Requirements and Procedures  

 

The financial aid database contains admitted students only.  Therefore, the OFA can only 

load FAFSAs for fully admitted students with an established ProSAM record. If a student 

is not fully admitted, but submitted a FAFSA with the UM school code, then that 

student’s FAFSA record will be held electronically in a suspense (pending) file until the 

student is admitted – at which point the FAFSA can be manually and/or automatically 

loaded to ProSAM. 

 

In the financial aid database, the award “year” is set up so that it can identify each student 

as undergraduate (e.g., 2020, representing 2019-20) or graduate/professional (2020GR) 

based on his/her UM admission status.  Since FAFSAs are year-specific, ProSAM will 

attempt to match the FAFSA information with the student’s admissions status before 

loading to ensure that the data is not inconsistent. 

 

For processing purposes, the OFA database system assigns students on an annual basis to 

a single, mutually-exclusive “track” (or category).  The default track is “No FAFSA 

Submitted”.  Following FAFSA loads, the track will change to one of the types below:  

 

• Valid ISIR – Not Selected for Verification 

• Correction Returning from CPS 

• Dependent Selected for Verification 

• Error – Student Not Assigned a Track in Batch 

• Independent Selected for Verification 

• Institutionally Selected for Verification (dependent or independent) 

http://www.fafsa.gov/


• Invalid – ISIR and Admission Program Type Mismatch 

• Rejected –No EFC Calculated 

• Student has ISIR/Waived Verification 

• Track for Correction Records 
 

In general, these distinctions are based on whether the FAFSA has been selected for 

verification or not, or is rejected.  In addition, there are several error tracks that must be 

monitored.  One track, “Student has ISIR/Waived Verification”, can only be set manually 

by an OFA staff member upon the request of a student who does not plan to complete the 

process and wants to opt out of any automatic reminders.  (These students will not qualify 

for federal or need-based aid.)  For more information about verification, refer to policy 

“3.5 Verification”. 

 

Data from a student’s FAFSA is accessible throughout the ProSAM system, and a 

printable version of the compiled FAFSA is available for use by the OFA or student as 

needed.  

 

 

Part 12.2 Detecting and Resolving Issues Preventing FAFSA Loads 

 

The OFA works to detect and resolve issues that prevent FAFSA loads, particularly for, 

but not limited to, the following conditions:  

 

• No FAFSA Submitted – The student neglected to include the UM school 
code, or incorrectly answered questions on the FAFSA regarding the student’s 

grade level. The OFA would request that the student make changes to the 

FAFSA (to include the school code), or staff could make corrections 

administratively (for items like erroneous grade level) if the correct 

information can be verified through UM’s own records. 

 

• Rejected –No EFC Calculated – Parent information is missing on the 
FAFSA (for dependent students), or FAFSA was not signed. The OFA would 

instruct the student to correct FAFSA to include parent information and/or 

signatures. Or, when parent information is missing, the OFA may determine, 

through communication with the student, if the student is eligible for 

consideration for a dependency status change through professional judgment 

(i.e., Dependency Override).  

 

• Track for Correction Records – A mismatch exists between the DOB that 
was entered on the student’s FAFSA as compared to the DOB that appears in 

the student’s financial aid record. The OFA would instruct the student to 

correct the FAFSA if the DOB is correct in ProSAM but incorrect on the 

FAFSA, OR to provide a copy of the student’s driver’s license (or other 

documentation verifying the student’s DOB) to UM’s Registrar’s Office if the 

DOB is correct on the FAFSA but incorrect in the student’s financial aid 

database record. 

 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=11863276


Aside from the above conditions that prevent FAFSA loads, if there are other 

discrepancies between certain information on the student’s FAFSA and that in the 

student’s financial aid database record (i.e., name, year, SSN), the student’s FAFSA is 

relegated to a holding file for partial matches (the “Preprocessor”) in ProSAM. The OFA 

reviews these on a case-by-case basis to determine the reason for the mismatch, and with 

proper information/documentation, the OFA may manually load the FAFSA from the 

Preprocessor. The list below provides a general overview of procedures the OFA follows 

to resolve suspended ISIRs in the Preprocessor:  

 

• Name Mismatch – If the student’s DOB and SSN match, the OFA must verify 
the student’s correct last name. If the student’s last name is correct on the FAFSA 

but incorrect in student records, the OFA would instruct the student to correct 

their last name in UM’s records (which may require additional documentation 

submitted to Admissions or the Registrar). If the student’s last name is incorrect 

on the FAFSA, the OFA would instruct the student to correct the FAFSA.  Certain 

conditions regarding name mismatches (like the inclusion or exclusion of special 

characters like apostrophes or hyphens) may be resolved by simply loading the 

FAFSA manually from the Preprocessor, provided the OFA can verify the 

student’s identity.  

 

• Year Mismatch – If the student’s name, DOB, and SSN match, the OFA must 
determine the accuracy of the student’s grade level. If the OFA can verify the 

accuracy of the student’s grade level in university records, the OFA may make the 

FAFSA corrections (i.e., if correcting information from undergraduate to 

graduate), or instruct the student to correct the FAFSA (if correcting information 

from graduate to undergraduate which may then necessitate the student answer 

other dependency status questions, and include parent information on the 

FAFSA). The OFA never manually loads ISIRs with a year mismatch.  

 

• SSN Mismatch – If the student’s last name and DOB match, the OFA would 
instruct the student to provide a copy of the Social Security Card with SSN to the 

Admissions Office to correct information in university records. Or, the OFA 

would instruct the student to re-submit a FAFSA with a correct SSN if the SSN is 

incorrect on the FAFSA. The OFA never manually loads ISIRs with SSN 

mismatch.  

 

 

 

Part 12.3 Subsequent ISIR Loads 

 

When changes are made to a processed FAFSA (by the student, the school, or CPS), CPS 

creates another “transaction” (or version) of the application.  The original transaction for 

that award year is numbered “01”, and subsequent versions are “02” and beyond.  

Although the ProSAM system stores all FAFSA data, only one transaction is active for 

display and processing at a time (unless the student has both an undergraduate and a 

graduate/professional record open in a given year). 

 



The OFA loads all subsequent ISIRs (provided the ISIR includes the UM school code) 

when FAFSA corrections have been made by the applicant (student/parent), the OFA, 

another institution, or the federal processor (CPS). The database system generates a status 

of “previously awarded” or “already verified” if these processes occurred prior to the new 

FAFSA being received. The system also generates a report for each of these statuses that 

are regularly reviewed by OFA staff to verify accuracy of financial aid awarding when 

the “previously awarded” or “already verified” status appears in a student’s financial aid 

record. The review of these reports also assists in resolving conflicting information when 

comparing FAFSAs (see policy “13.0 Conflicting Information”).  

 

If a subsequent FAFSA is selected for verification by the federal processor, AND a 

student has been awarded federal or need-based aid on a previous ISIR that was NOT 

selected for verification, the OFA requires the student to complete verification in order to 

retain any federal or need-based aid. If changes in an applicant’s FAFSA causes 

verification selection (and/or a change in the student’s eligibility for federal or need-

based aid), and the student does not complete verification, paybacks on aid already 

awarded would result. 

 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=11872080

