
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

Policy Name:  Institutional Requirements 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies 

and procedures regarding its institutional definitions and administrative 

capability related to management of the Federal Title IV programs and 

other forms of student financial assistance. 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply with 

administrative and regulatory requirements. All policies and procedures 

below are in accordance the Federal Student Aid Handbook. 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

1.0  Institutional Mission 

1.1   Institutional Facts 

1.2  Map of the University of Mississippi Campuses 

1.3  Federal Title IV Aid Eligibility 

1.4  Office of Financial Aid Mission Statement 

1.5  Financial Aid Facts 

1.6  Approval to Participate in the Federal Title IV Programs 

1.7  Current Institutional Accreditation 

1.8  Financial Aid Organizational Chart 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 
 

 DOE – Department of Education 

FAFSA- Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

https://ifap.ed.gov/fsahandbook/1617FSAHbkActiveIndexMaster.html


 

Part 1.0 Institutional Mission 

 

Name of Institution: The University of Mississippi      DOE ID: 002440-00 

 

The University of Mississippi's mission is to create, evaluate, share, and apply knowledge in a 

free, open, and inclusive environment of intellectual inquiry. 

 

Building upon a distinguished foundation in the liberal arts, the state's oldest university serves 

the people of Mississippi and the world through a breadth of academic, research, and 

professional programs. 

 

UM provides an academic experience that emphasizes critical thinking; encourages intellectual 

depth and creativity; challenges and inspires a diverse community of undergraduate, graduate, 

and professional students; provides enriching opportunities outside the classroom; supports 

lifelong learning; and develops a sense of global responsibility.  

 

 

Part 1.1 Institutional Facts 

 

Chartered by the Mississippi Legislature in 1848, UM is a public, comprehensive, research 

institution committed to the creation, dissemination, and application of knowledge through a 

variety of undergraduate, graduate, and professional programs as well as public service 

activities.  Also known affectionately as “Ole Miss”, the University was established in Oxford, 

MS, as a liberal arts institution.  It now offers degree programs in the College of Liberal Arts 

and nine professional schools: School of Accountancy, School of Applied Sciences, School of 

Business Administration, School of Education, School of Engineering, Graduate School, 

School of Journalism and New Media, School of Law, and School of Pharmacy. 

 

Today, the University also has 5 branch campuses.  The Medical Center in Jackson houses 

schools of Medicine, Nursing, Health Related Professions, Dentistry, and Graduate Studies in 

the Health Sciences, and the University Hospitals and Health System.  The other satellites are 

all within 70 miles of the Oxford campus:  Tupelo, DeSoto County, Booneville, and Grenada.  

They work in conjunction with area community college partners to help students complete their 

college degree in bachelor's and master's degree programs. Junior, senior, and graduate-level 

college coursework is offered through day, evening, and online courses. 

 

The University’s homepage is located at https://olemiss.edu/.   

 

Federal regulations require universities to make information available to the public concerning 

each institution’s academic programs, retention and graduation rates, crime reports, student 

record privacy policies,  costs of attendance, financial aid procedures, diversity statistics, and 

other important data.  These “Student Consumer Information” disclosures are located at h 

https://olemiss.edu/info/disclosures/. 

 

https://olemiss.edu/


 

Part 1.2 Map of the University of Mississippi Campuses 

 

 

 

                     

 

 

The Medical Center in Jackson has its own financial aid office, which is separately 

administered.  For purposes of this document, the statistics and policies referenced below will 

apply to all campuses except the Medical Center.   

 

Main Oxford Campus 

Desoto Campus 

Tupelo Campus 

Booneville Campus 

Grenada Campus 

Medical Center  

 

 



 

Part 1.3 Federal Title IV Aid Eligibility 

 

As a public university, UM qualifies as an “eligible institution of higher learning” for purposes 

of awarding Federal Title IV aid.   It is authorized by the State of Mississippi to operate 

postsecondary educational programs.  As required, the state has processes in place for 

reviewing and acting on complaints concerning the schools under its jurisdiction.  (For more 

information on the complaint options, refer to the Student Consumer Information Disclosures 

website at https://olemiss.edu/info/disclosures).  

      

Students who receive federal financial assistance must be degree-seeking at UM.  (The UM 

Medical Center is the only campus approved to offer certificate programs for purposes of 

federal aid.)  All academic degrees are offered through credit hour programs (no clock hour 

programs). 

 

The academic calendar is comprised of semester-based standard terms, with a minimum of 30 

weeks of instructional time (which include final examinations).  The OFA defines the award 

year as comprised of:  Fall (Fall Semester, Fall 1 mini-session, and Fall 2 mini-session) and 

Spring (Winter intersession, Spring Semester, Spring 1 mini-session, and Spring 2 mini-

session).  Summer is considered a trailer to the award year.  It is a combined term that includes 

May intersession, First Summer mini-session, Full Summer mini-session, Second Summer 

mini-session, and August intersession. For more information about the academic calendar, 

please refer to the Office of the Registrars website at https://registrar.olemiss.edu/academic-

calendar/.  

 

For an undergraduate student, full-time enrollment is set at a minimum of 12 hours per 

semester.  However, in order to progress from one class level to another, students must earn 30 

credit hours per year.   

 

 

Part 1.4 Office of Financial Aid Mission Statement 

 

 

The Office of Financial Aid at the University of Mississippi is committed to the institution’s 

goals of enrolling and graduating highly talented men and women of diverse social, ethnic, 

economic, and academic backgrounds. 

 

Our student-focused staff helps students and their families maximize all possible resources 

available for financing the costs of attending the university.  We provide efficient and effective 

access to programs and services through personalized attention and state-of-the-art 

technology. 

  

We coordinate the administration of student financial assistance to ensure equity and 

regulatory compliance in the delivery of funds. We are dedicated to providing for the proper 

https://olemiss.edu/info/disclosures
https://registrar.olemiss.edu/academic-calendar/
https://registrar.olemiss.edu/academic-calendar/


stewardship of all university, government, and private funds that are utilized by our students to 

finance their education. 

  

We aspire to negate financial barriers and minimize procedural barriers that can frustrate 

financial aid applicants.  We work to ensure that our students learn to manage their financial 

affairs in a responsible manner by promoting money management and financial literacy.  Our 

staff provides advocacy on issues relevant to student success. 

 

 

 

Part 1.5 Financial Aid Facts 

 

The OFA in Oxford serves the needs of students at the main campus as well as the 4 

surrounding regional (satellite) centers.  The total dollars administered is reported each year in 

the Chancellor’s Annual Report.   

 

In conjunction with the Medical Center, UM provides one combined FISAP (the annual “Fiscal 

Operations Report and Application to Participate” in the Federal Title IV programs) to DOE 

each year.  (The DOE “Program Participation Agreement” applies to the entire institution – see 

Part 1.6.) 

 

The OFA awards only admitted students as determined by the Office of Admissions, the 

Graduate School, or the Law School, as appropriate. 

 

The FAFSA, which is available at https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/fafsa is used for determining not 

only Federal Title IV eligibility, but also eligibility for need-based institutional and state 

scholarships, grants, and loans. 

 

In addition to administering federal and state aid programs, the OFA manages scholarships 

(which includes awarding, budget projections, reconciliations and/or reporting for athletic, 

endowed, institutional and outside awards), Federal Work-Study (including the Family 

Literacy/Math Count programs), reporting functions (all internal/external requests for financial 

aid data, including outside surveys like IPEDs and Common Data Set), accounting functions 

(Return of Title IV Funds, attendance verification, and FISAP), and the financial aid system.  

(All programming to run ProSAM, a product of Sigma Systems, is done by the OFA).  See the 

organizational chart in Part 1.8. 

 

https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/fafsa


 
Part 1.6 Approval to Participate in the Federal Title IV Programs 

 

 



 
 

 

 



 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Part 1.7 Current Institutional Accreditation 

 



Part 1.8 Financial Aid Organizational Chart 

 

                    


