
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

 

Policy Name:  FSEOG – Federal Supplemental Education Opportunity Grant 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for the FSEOG program. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

Policy Contents: 

    

6.0   FSEOG Program Overview 

6.1  FSEOG Student Eligibility 

6.2  Selection and Awarding of Students 

 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 EFC – Expected Family Contribution 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 FSEOG – Federal Supplemental Education Opportunity Grant 

 HEA – Higher Education Act of 1965 

OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

UM – University of Mississippi 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Part 6.0 FSEOG Program Overview 

 

FSEOG is a federal assistance grant reserved for college students who demonstrate the 

greatest need for financial aid to attend school. 

 

If selected, FSEOG awards of up to $4,000 per year (but no less than $100 per year) are 

available to students pursuing a first bachelor’s degree who show exceptional financial 

need. Because funds are limited, FSEOG awards at UM usually do not exceed $1,500 per 

year (including the summer term).  

 

To apply, a student must complete the FAFSA.  

 

More information about FSEOG is available from the Federal Guide to Student Aid. 

 

 

Part 6.1 FSEOG Student Eligibility 

 

A student is eligible to receive an FSEOG for an award if he/she meets the following 

basic qualifications: 

 Is a United States citizen or eligible non-citizen. 

 Does not have a bachelor’s degree. 

 Is not in default of any federal student loan. 

 Does not have a Federal Pell Grant overpayment. 

 Has filed a FAFSA for the appropriate academic year. 

 Is enrolled or accepted for enrollment as an undergraduate student. 

 Demonstrates exceptional financial need.   
 

 

Part 6.2 Selection and Awarding of Students 

 

 

Based on the annual funding allocation, the OFA makes a determination of how much 

can be awarded during the Fall and Spring semesters and how much will be reserved for 

summer attendance.  Because funds are limited at UM, only students who qualify for the 

maximum Federal Pell Grant (i.e., EFC = 0 on the FAFSA) are awarded FSEOG. The 

student cannot have exceeded their lifetime eligibility for Pell (but if a student received 

Pell during that award year prior to reaching the lifetime limit, he or she is eligible for 

SEOG for the entire award year).  No awarding preference exists that would restrict 

either dependent or independent students from full consideration.  

 

Once the awarding process begins for an upcoming academic year, the OFA identifies all 

students eligible for FSEOG.  The Fall/Spring allotment is then divided by the number of 

students to determine the annual amount per individual, which is split evenly between 

https://fafsa.ed.gov/
https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/types/grants-scholarships/fseog
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_citizen
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bachelors_degree
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Default_%28finance%29
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federal_Pell_Grant


Fall and Spring semesters.  All students are packaged on the assumption of full-time 

attendance, but if FSEOG recipients enroll part-time, they are still permitted to retain 

their grant at the original semester value since the amounts are typically small.  Once 

these awards are made, the funds earmarked for the full academic year are fully 

expended. 

 

Enrollment patterns at UM are traditional, with small numbers of incoming 

undergraduates enrolling at the mid-year.  However, an attempt is made to provide 

reasonable access to grant funding for this population. At the beginning of the regular 

Spring term, a report is run to identify FSEOG-eligible students who are new Spring 

admits.  This group in its entirety is awarded as well.  They receive the same “per 

semester” amount as the Fall/Spring students. 

 

The remaining FSEOG funding is available to students who wish to take summer classes.  

They must complete the online Summer Financial Aid Application available in 

myOleMiss and indicate the number of hours for each summer session they plan to 

enroll.  Eligible students are typically awarded a set amount per 3 hour class with a 

funding cap established for the combined summer term.  

 

Funds received under FSEOG are maintained by the University’s Office of Accounting. 

The OFA is also responsible for reporting FSEOG expenditures on the FISAP (the annual 

federal fiscal operations report) as confirmed by the UM Accounting Office. 

 

 

 

 

 


