
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

Policy Name:  Conflicting Information 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for resolving conflicting information 

related to a student’s application and/or eligibility for Federal Title 

IV aid. 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements.  

 

Policy Contents: 

    

13.0   Resolving Conflicting Information Overview 

13.1  Resolving Conflicting Information Procedures  

13.1.1  C Flags 

13.1.2  Subsequent FAFSA loads (Previously Awarded, Already Verified

 reports) 

13.1.3  Verification 

13.1.4  Review of FAFSA Data and Professional Judgment 

13.1.5  Documentation/information Received by Other UM Departments 

13.1.6  Rejected SARs 

13.2  Reporting Fraud and Abuse  

13.3  Conflicting Information Examples with Solutions 

   

Definitions and Terms: 

 COD – Common Origination Database 

 CPS – Central Processing System (U.S. Department of Education) 

 DHS/USCIS – Department of Homeland Security/U.S. Citizenship and   

   Immigration Services 

 DOE – Department of Education 

 EFC – Expected Family Contribution  

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 NSLDS – National Student Loan Data System 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 OIG – Office of Inspector General 

 SAR – Student Aid Report 

 SS – Selective Service 

 SSA – Social Security Administration  

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 VA – Veteran’s Affairs 



  

Part 13.0 Resolving Conflicting Information Overview 

 

Each year, students apply for Federal Title IV aid (as well as need-based state and 

institutional aid) using the FAFSA.  Any conflicting information that is identified by the 

OFA regarding student eligibility and/or FAFSA data (regardless of the source) must be 

resolved before aid can be delivered. 

 

 

Part 13.1 Resolving Conflicting Information Procedures  

 

The OFA has implemented multiple systems checks to electronically recognize data 

discrepancies that affect eligibility.  Automated rules called “diagnostics” will then 

prompt the staff to review a student’s record.  In addition, the OFA may uncover 

conflicting information through manual review of data and documentation.  

 

The primary avenues for finding conflicting information include, but are not limited to, 

the following review processes: 

 

• C Flags on the “processed” FAFSA (also known as the SAR) 

• Subsequent FAFSA loads (Already Verified, Previously Awarded reports) 

• Verification 

• Comment Codes 400/401 

• IRS Request Errors 

• Professional Judgment 

• Documentation/information received by other UM departments 

• Rejected FAFSAs 
 

 

Part 13.1.1 C Flags 

 

In some instances, a “C Flag” is assigned by DOE to a FAFSA as an indication that 

something on the student’s FAFSA record must be corrected or confirmed before aid can 

be awarded.  The OFA detects C Flags on student FAFSAs through the financial aid 

database system (ProSAM). Resolution for C Flags is conducted through the review of 

system-generated reports corresponding with each C Flag category and corresponding 

comment code. 

 

Issues that generate a “C Flag” include but are not limited to: 

• Lack of Selective Service registration, if required 

• Immigration or eligible non-citizen status not confirmed by DHS/USCIS 

• Citizenship status not confirmed by the SSA 

• Social Security number mismatch 

• Veteran status not confirmed 

• Unusual Enrollment History 



• A prior drug conviction 

• Erroneous tax/income information as detected by CPS 
 

When reviewing conflicting data, the OFA uses information obtained from the student, 

other UM departments (e.g., Veterans and Military Services to verify student 

veteran/active duty status), or other agencies (i.e., DHS/USCIS, SSA, SS, NSLDS, COD, 

etc.) to resolve any discrepancies. 

 

A full listing of SAR Comment Codes that generate C Flags may be obtained through the 

following DOE website (under “SAR Comment Codes and Text”): 

https://fsadownload.ed.gov/docsStudentAidGateway.htm  

 

 

Part 13.1.2 Subsequent FAFSA Loads (Previously Awarded, Already Verified) 

 

The OFA loads all subsequent FAFSAs (provided the FAFSA includes the UM school 

code) when corrections have been made by the student or parent, the OFA, another 

institution, or the CPS. The financial aid system generates a status of “previously 

awarded” or “already verified” in the student’s financial aid database record if financial 

aid was awarded (for “previously awarded”) or if verification  was completed (for 

“already verified”) prior to the new FAFSA being received.  

 

The system also generates a report that is regularly reviewed by OFA staff to confirm the 

accuracy of financial aid awarding when “previously awarded” or “already verified” flags 

appear in a student’s record. The review of these reports assists in resolving conflicting 

information when comparing different versions of the FAFSA.  (Also see policy “12.0 

FAFSA Processing”).  

 

For students selected for verification:  If a student had previously completed 

verification, and a subsequent change occurs to the FAFSA, the OFA will review the new 

information to determine its accuracy. If the changes do not affect either the student’s 

eligibility OR prior verification data entry (which had already been approved by the 

OFA), no action is taken. If changes do affect the student’s eligibility and/or previous 

verification data entry, the OFA will re-verify the student’s FAFSA.  

 

If a subsequent FAFSA is selected for verification by the federal processor despite 

previous FAFSA records being exempt from verification, the student is then required to 

complete verification in order to receive or retain any federal or need-based aid. If the 

award package changes due to the verification results, OR the student fails to complete 

verification, paybacks on previously awarded aid will be made. If the new FAFSA is 

received by the OFA after the student has ceased enrollment at UM, it may be determined 

in some cases that paybacks may not be necessary.   

 

For students not selected for verification: The OFA may require clarification or 

documentation justifying any changes that were made to a subsequent FAFSA if the OFA 

determines that the changes affect a student’s eligibility or current award status.  

https://fsadownload.ed.gov/docsStudentAidGateway.htm


 

 

 

Part 13.1.3 Verification 

 

The OFA completes verification of selected student FAFSAs by comparing information 

from the student’s FAFSA with other required documentation and making any FAFSA 

changes on the student’s behalf as necessary (c.f., policy “3.5 Verification”). During the 

verification process, the OFA might determine conflicting information that includes but is 

not limited to: 

• Erroneous FAFSA tax/income information 

• Missing tax/income information 

• Student/parent tax-filing status 

• Student/parent marital status 

• Incorrect or missing cash, savings, asset information 
 

 

Part 13.1.4 Review of FAFSA Data and Professional Judgment 

 

The OFA also reserves the right to request reasonable documentation to verify any 

FAFSA information related to student eligibility. The need to resolve conflicting 

information may also occur through the professional judgment review process (c.f., 

policy “3.6.B Expected Family Contribution and Dependency Professional Judgments 

and Reviews”) which include but are not limited to:  
 

• Dependency Override 

• Emancipated Minor 

• Homeless /Risk of Being Homeless 

• Legal Guardianship 

• Orphan / Ward of the Court / Foster Care 

• Proof of Legal Dependents 

• Adjustment to EFC 

• Parent Attending College 
 

During the professional judgment review process, the OFA might determine conflicting 

information including but not limited to: 

• Errors regarding household information 

• Missing or erroneous untaxed income information (i.e., if a student/parent 
receives child support but fails to include this in the untaxed income section of the 

FAFSA) 

• Incorrect claim about dependency status 

• Missing or incorrect asset/investment information 



 

Part 13.1.5 Documentation/information Received by Other UM Departments 

 

The OFA often works in conjunction with other UM departments (e.g., Admissions, 

Bursar, Graduate School, Registrar, etc.) and agencies (e.g., COD, NSLDS) to review 

student information and resolve data conflicts.  Examples of these interactions include: 

 

• Admissions (confirmation that a final high school diploma is received) 

• Veteran’s and Military Services (review and approval of military documents to 
determine student veteran/active duty status) 

• Bursar (reporting of scholarship checks received directly) 

• Registrar (reporting changes in student enrollment) 
 

 

Part 13.1.6 Rejected FAFSA 

 

A rejected FAFSA contains missing or erroneous information. As a result, the federal 

processor is unable to calculate the Expected Family Contribution.  A rejected FAFSA 

cannot be resolved at the school level only; corrections must be submitted to the federal 

processor in order to resolve the rejected status.  

 

Issues that generate a rejected FAFSA include but are not limited to: 

• Missing parent information for a student considered to be dependent 

• Missing signatures on the FAFSA 

• Inconsistencies between certain tax and adjusted gross income amounts 
 

 

Part 13.2 Reporting Fraud and Abuse 

 

Fraud is the intent to deceive, as opposed to a mistake.  If the OFA suspects that a 

student, employee, or other individual has misreported information or altered 

documentation to fraudulently obtain financial aid, the OFA Director will investigate.  As 

appropriate, the Director may consult with the school’s legal counsel or local law 

enforcement. 

 

Common misconduct includes but is not limited to false claims of independent student 

status, false claims of citizenship, use of false identities, forgery of signatures of 

certifications, and false statements of income. 

 

Any credible information indicating that an applicant for federal student aid may have 

engaged in fraud or other criminal misconduct in connection with his or her application 

should be referred to the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Inspector General.  In 

addition, the OFA will refer any third-party service provider who may have engaged in 

fraud, breach of fiduciary responsibility, or other illegal conduct involving Federal 



Student Aid programs.  The OFA will cooperate with subsequent investigations by 

providing all information relevant to the case(s). 

 

 

Office of Inspector General Contact Information: 

U.S. Department of Education 

400 Maryland Avenue, SW 

Washington, DC 20202-1500 

1-800-MIS-USED 

E-mail: oig.hotline@ed.gov 

Web: http://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oig/hotline.html 

 

 

Part 13.3 Conflicting Information Examples with Solutions 

 

The chart below includes, but is not limited to, certain examples of conflicting 

information and solutions: 

 

Office Topic Conflicting Information Example Solution 

Registrar 

 

FAFSA  

 

Social Security number reported on 

FAFSA does not match with 

information included on admissions 

application or vice versa, or student 

neglected to include Social Security 

number on Admissions application 

which prevents FAFSA from 

loading to financial aid database. 

Student should submit 

copy of Social Security 

card to the Registrar to 

correct Social Security 

number in student database 

record, or student will 

need to correct FAFSA 

information. 

 

Bursar Scholarship The Bursar's Office receives a 

scholarship check for an enrolled 

student. 

 

Bursar's Office must notify 

the OFA to ensure the 

award is correctly reported 

on student's financial aid 

package. 

Financial Aid FAFSA/ 

Verification 

Parent or student indicated on the 

FAFSA, and by signing the 

verification worksheet, that they 

will not file an IRS tax return. The 

OFA has reason to believe they are 

required to file a return because the 

amount of reported income equals 

or exceeds the amount required to 

file a tax return as indicated by 

instructions provided by IRS.  

Inform student/parent of 

IRS requirement and 

explain verification cannot 

be completed until tax 

return is filed.   

 



 

Office Topic Conflicting Information Example Solution 

Financial Aid 

 

FAFSA/ 

Verification 

 

Mismatch between parent tax filing 

status and parent marital status 

when comparing FAFSA and 

verification worksheet to IRS tax 

information. 

 

Request parent submit a 

written statement with 

explanation. After review 

of written statement, may 

require correction of 

FAFSA data, revision of 

verification worksheet 

household information, or 

correction of parent tax 

return. 

Financial Aid 

 

FAFSA/ 

Verification 

 

Parental information on verification 

worksheet differs from that reported 

on the student's FAFSA (i.e., 

parent/step-parent information is 

included on the FAFSA but not the 

same on verification worksheet, or 

vice versa). 

 

Request parent submit 

written statement with 

explanation. After review 

of written statement, may 

require correction of 

FAFSA data, revision of 

verification worksheet 

household information, or 

correction of parent tax 

return (if statement implies 

conflicting marital/tax 

filing status). 

Financial Aid 

 

FAFSA/ 

Verification 

 

A student was not selected for 

verification, but the OFA has 

student (and/or parent) tax 

information on file which indicates 

conflicting information with 

FAFSA. 

Contact student (and/or 

parent) requesting FAFSA 

corrections, or the OFA 

may institutionally select 

student for verification. 

Financial Aid 

 

FAFSA/ 

Verification 

 

The OFA has reason to believe that 

grandparent information (or other 

family member) is included in the 

parent information section of the 

FAFSA and household information 

section of verification worksheet. 

 

The OFA would seek 

clarification from student 

if parent information is 

incorrect and determine if 

student should correct 

FAFSA to include legal 

parent (biological or 

adoptive) information, or 

request a professional 

judgment review for 

dependency status change 

(i.e., Dependency 

Override).  



 

Office Topic Conflicting Information Example Solution 

Financial Aid 

 

FAFSA/ 

Verification 

 

The OFA has reason to believe that 

incorrect parent information is on 

FAFSA. Example: legal parents 

divorced and student lists father on 

FAFSA because father claimed 

student on father's tax return and 

offers financial support for 

education, but student lives 

majority of the year with mother.  

The OFA would advise 

student to correct FAFSA 

to include mother's 

information (and step-

parent if mother is re-

married).  

 

Financial Aid FAFSA/ 

Verification 

(Comment 

Codes 400 

and 401) 

After a student or parent used the 

IRS Data Retrieval Tool to transfer 

IRS data to the FAFSA, it was 

determined there were errors in 

some of the information related to 

the student or parent adjusted gross 

income, additional financial 

information, or untaxed income 

amounts.  

The OFA must review 

information and request 

additional documentation 

from student/parent to 

correct any erroneous 

information on the 

FAFSA, and if necessary, 

adjust student awarding if 

eligibility changes.  

Financial Aid FAFSA/ 

Verification 

After a student or parent used the 

IRS Data Retrieval Tool to transfer 

IRS data to the FAFSA, but after 

submission of the FAFSA a 

subsequent change made the student 

or parent ineligible to use the IRS 

Data Retrieval Tool.  

The OFA must contact the 

applicant or parent, as 

applicable, to determine if 

the income tax return 

information that was 

transferred into the 

FAFSA form is correct 

given the changes the 

applicant or parent made 

to IRS DRT eligibility 

criteria, and make any 

necessary changes to the 

applicant’s FAFSA as 

needed, and if necessary, 

adjust student awarding if 

eligibility changes. 

 

Financial Aid FAFSA/ 

Verification 

After a student or parent used the 

IRS Data Retrieval Tool to transfer 

IRS data to the FAFSA, but after 

doing so the IRS determined the 

student or parent filed an amended 

tax return (the income and tax 

information transferred to the 

FAFSA will be original tax data, 

not the amended tax data). 

The OFA must contact the 

applicant or parent, as 

applicable, and make any 

necessary changes to the 

FAFSA, regardless of 

whether the FAFSA was 

required to be verified, and 

if necessary, adjust student 

awarding if eligibility 

changes. 

 



 

Office Topic Conflicting Information Example Solution 

Financial Aid 

 

Federal Aid 

Eligibility 

 

Potential Overpayment (POP) 

Report received from COD states 

that a student was awarded over 

100% of Pell award for academic 

year. 

 

 

Student may have attended 

more than one school 

during academic year. An 

OFA administrator would 

need to check COD and 

determine what institution 

over-awarded the student. 

The student and/or that 

school would be asked to 

resolve the percentage of 

Pell that exceeds the 100% 

(maximum award) via a 

payback. 

Financial Aid 

 

FAFSA 

Reject Code 

 

Student's EFC is not calculated 

because of incorrect or lacking 

information on FAFSA (i.e., 

lacking parent information, lacking 

student/parent signatures, taxes paid 

equal to/greater than Adjusted 

Gross Income amount). 

 

Student/parent must 

update FAFSA with 

appropriate information. In 

some cases, when parent 

information is missing 

from a dependent student's 

FAFSA, student may 

request a professional 

judgment review to change 

dependency status (i.e., 

dependency override). 

Financial Aid 

 

C Flags 

 

The OFA is unable to award student 

federal aid (i.e., loan default, 

citizenship mismatch, male student 

not registered with Selective 

Service).  

The OFA requests and 

reviews appropriate 

documentation (based on 

specific situation) before 

awarding federal aid. 



 

Office Topic Conflicting Information Example Solution 

Financial Aid 

 

Previously 

Awarded  

 

Student not selected for 

verification, is awarded federal aid, 

and aid disbursed. FAFSA 

corrections (by student/parent or 

other institution) made after aid 

awarded/disbursed.  

 

 

The OFA reviews student 

Pell eligibility, prior 

degree status, dependency 

status, loan limit status and 

compares this to student's 

financial aid packaging. 

The OFA may make 

adjustments to financial 

aid packaging if eligibility 

changes. In some cases, 

the OFA will review 

subsequent FAFSA 

information and request 

additional documentation/ 

clarification of any 

erroneous information in 

order to resolve any 

discrepancies.  

Financial Aid 

 

Dependency 

Status 

 

Student is younger than age 24, is 

not considered a veteran and either 

knowingly or unknowingly selects 

information on the FAFSA that 

indicates independent status. 

 

The OFA may require 

submission of supporting 

documentation (through a 

professional judgment 

review) to support/justify 

student's independent 

status. If documentation 

supports/justifies student’s 

independent status as 

approved by the OFA, 

student will be considered 

independent and awarded 

as such. If the OFA does 

not approve claim of 

independent status, student 

will need to correct 

FAFSA info to include 

parent information. If 

student knowingly 

submitted falsified 

information (on FAFSA or 

in written form for 

professional judgment 

review), and this is 

confirmed by the OFA, the 

OFA has grounds to report 

student to the OIG. 



 

Office Topic Conflicting Information Example Solution 

Financial Aid 

 

Forged 

Signatures 

 

Student forges another person's 

signature on any financial aid 

document. 

If suspected by the OFA, 

the OFA has grounds to 

report student to OIG. 

Financial Aid 

 

Forged 

Signature 

(PLUS 

application) 

 

Student signs as parent or endorser 

on Federal Direct PLUS loan. 

 

If suspected by the OFA, 

the OFA has grounds to 

report student to OIG. If 

confirmed after aid 

awarded and disbursed, 

the OFA administers 

payback on loan. 

Financial Aid 

 

 

 

Unusual 

Enrollment  

 

 

Review of student's previous 

enrollment indicates missing 

transcript information. 

 

The OFA requests student 

submit all official 

transcripts to our school 

before resolving unusual 

enrollment status. In some 

cases, Registrar's office 

may administer holds (i.e., 

preventing future 

enrollment, transcript 

release) until all 

appropriate documentation 

received.  

Financial Aid 

 

Unusual 

Enrollment  

 

Review of student's previous 

enrollment indicates student did not 

earn academic credit at a previous 

institution where student was 

awarded Pell grant. 

 

The OFA requires student 

to submit documentation 

of why student failed to 

earn academic credit in 

order to determine: 1) if 

documentation supports 

reasons given by student 

for student's failure to earn 

credit; and 2) student did 

not enroll only to receive 

credit balance funds. The 

OFA may authorize 

continued Pell eligibility 

based on review and 

approval of 

documentation, or deny 

continued eligibility 

(student has right to appeal 

decision). 



 

Office Topic Conflicting Information Example Solution 

Graduate 

School 

 

Enrollment 

Hours 

 

A graduate student, who is 

considered at full-time enrollment, 

is taking both graduate and 

undergraduate level courses. 

However, the OFA will not disburse 

aid based on full-time enrollment 

because student's course load 

includes undergraduate courses.  

 

Before the OFA can award 

and disburse aid based on 

student's enrollment status, 

the student must have 

written documentation 

from the academic 

department stating that 

undergraduate courses are 

required for the graduate 

degree.  Otherwise the 

class is ignored in the 

enrollment level. 

Registrar 

 

Registration 

Status 

 

Student re-enrolls with the school 

and is registered as a non-degree 

seeking student, but informs the 

OFA he/she would be degree-

seeking and able to receive federal 

financial aid.  

 

In many situations, the 

student needs to speak to 

the academic dean of 

his/her academic 

department. However, 

sometimes the Registrar's 

Office can resolve issue. 

Once student is classified 

as degree-seeking, student 

is eligible to receive 

federal financial aid.  

Registrar 

 

FAFSA  

 

Date of Birth (DOB) reported on 

FAFSA does not match with 

information in university or 

financial aid database systems, or 

vice versa.  

 

If DOB is accurate on 

FAFSA, student should 

take steps to correct DOB 

in university/financial aid 

databases (i.e., submit 

copy of Driver's License 

or documentation with 

correct DOB) through 

Registrar's office. Or, if 

DOB is incorrect on 

FAFSA, the OFA would 

advise student to correct 

FAFSA.  

 


