
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 5 
 

Policy for Student Information and Privacy in Online Education 
 

This policy applies to all credit-bearing online learning courses and programs offered by the 

University of Mississippi, beginning with the application for admission and continuing through 

to a student’s graduation, transfer, or withdrawal from study. 

 

Purpose of Policy 

 

The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the University of Mississippi operates in compliance 

with the provisions of the United States Federal Higher Education Opportunity Act (HEOA) [20 

U.S.C. 1099b, July 1, 2009], concerning the verification of student identity and the student’s 

right to privacy in online and distance learning. All credit-bearing courses and programs offered 

through online learning methods must verify that the student who registers for an online 

education course or program is the same student who participates in and completes the course 

or program and receives academic credit. At the same time ensuring that all stakeholders, both 

internal and external, actively protect the student’s privacy rights.   

 

Verification of Student Identity 

 

One or more of the following methods will be used to verify student identity: 

a) An individual secure login and password provided by the University of Mississippi. 

b) Proctored assessments (i.e. Distance Education Testing Lab) 

c) Other emerging technologies and practices shown to be effective in verifying student 

identification and that are approved by the University of Mississippi. 

d) Pedagogical and related practices that are effective in verifying student identity (faculty 

review, questions students, Attendance Policy for Online Education, etc.) 

 

Secure Login and Password 

Each student has their own assigned UM WebID and student-generated password to log 

into the learning management system. 

 

Proctored Assessments 

The University’s Policy for Proctored Assessments in Online Education will be used for 

proctored assessments. 

 

New or Emerging Technologies 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 5 
 

Third party vendors that provide robust identity verification software services (e.g., services 

similar to those used in the financial sector) could be used as an option by the Colleges and 

Schools. 

 

Pedagogical and Related Practices 

Online faculty will reference Section II of the University of Mississippi M-Book regarding 

Academic Policies, Standards and Regulations for Academic Conduct and Discipline as well 

as Procedures Related to Academic Misconduct Charges. 

 

Additional Information 

Online faculty will also follow the University of Mississippi’s Attendance Policy for Online 

Education. 

 

Students will be notified in writing at the time of registration or enrollment of any fees 

associated with the verification of student identity. 

 

Privacy Protection and Student’s Rights to Privacy 

 

The University of Mississippi protects the privacy of all students, including online and distance 

learning students, through adherence to the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 

(FERPA) (UM Policy DSA.DA. 100.002 - Right of Privacy – Personal Information), through 

compliance with other institutional policies and procedures governing the management and 

security of protected information of faculty, staff, and students (UM Policy 

ACA.IT.400.030  Information Confidentiality/Security), and by outlining the expectations of 

privacy for the university community as regards to electronic information (UM Policy 

ACA.IT.400.010  Privacy in the Electronic Environment). 

Personally identifiable information collected by the university may be used, at the discretion of 

the institution, as the basis for identity verification.  For example, a student requesting that 

their learning management system password be reset may be asked to provide two or more 

pieces of information for comparison with data on file, or to come to the IT Helpdesk in person 

with a photo ID for verification. 

 

All methods of verifying student identity in online learning must protect the privacy of student 

information.  All outside vendors and remote proctoring providers must comply with the 

university’s information privacy policies as outlined in this document.  
  
In circumstances where physical exams are administered to University of Mississippi students, 

return transfer of completed student exams is restricted to secured institutional resources (ex: 

https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10644277
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10654991
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10654991
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10654991
https://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10654991


 The University of Mississippi  

Page 3 of 5 
 

email or fax) and/or overnight carrier sent directly from the remote site administrator to the 

appropriate university representative or faculty member.  

 

Responsibilities 

 

All users of the university’s learning management system are responsible for maintaining the 

security of usernames, passwords and any other access credentials assigned.  The password 

used to enter university systems IS a secure credential.  Passwords may not be shared or given 

to anyone other than the user to whom they were assigned for any reason.  See the University 

of Mississippi’s IT Appropriate Use Policy for more information. 

 

Faculty teaching courses through online education methods have the primary responsibility for 

ensuring that their courses comply with the provisions of this policy.  Because technology and 

personal accountability may not verify identity absolutely or ensure academic integrity 

completely, faculty are encouraged, when feasible and pedagogically sound, to design courses 

that employ assignments and evaluations unique to the course and that support academic 

integrity and protect student privacy rights. 

 

Any new technologies or vendors used to verify student identity or that might jeopardize 

student privacy rights must be approved by the University of Mississippi, so that published 

information on student privacy can be maintained appropriately. 

 

The Office of the Provost is responsible for ensuring university-wide compliance with the 

provisions of this policy and that deans and chairs are informed of any changes in a timely 

fashion.  The Office of the Provost is responsible for publishing university-wide information on 

information security.  The Office of the Provost is also responsible for coordinating and 

promoting efficient use of university resources and services, and for ensuring that university 

level processes (e.g., admissions or registration) also remain in compliance with this policy. 

 

The Office of the Provost will work with the Office of Information Technology to notify students 

at the time of registration or enrollment of any projected additional student charges associated 

with verification of student identity. 

 

Compliance 

 

In accordance with the responsibilities outlined above, deans and chairs of college-level units 

are expected to ensure that all faculty and staff within their units remain in compliance with 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 4 of 5 
 

this policy.  Those policies on academic integrity and student information security should be 

widely disseminated throughout the university. 

 

Training for Faculty and Students 

 

The university provides faculty with appropriate training to use current and emerging 

pedagogical approaches and technologies to promote academic integrity and privacy.  

Additionally, the university provides information to students regarding academic integrity and 

privacy.  Syllabi and course orientations will include information for students to understand 

issues for each online course and the university as a whole.  Information about Student Privacy 

Rights, FERPA and UM’s processes for complying with its provisions is also published in the 

student handbook (M-Book Student Policy - http://dos.olemiss.edu/) 

 

Frequency of Review and Update 

 

This policy will be reviewed by the Office of the Provost for continued alignment with the 

appropriate federal regulations and policies and revised every two years.

http://dos.olemiss.edu/


 

Page 5 of 5 
 

 


