
 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

Policy Name:  Withdrawals 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current 

policies and procedures for Withdrawals. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply 

with administrative and regulatory requirements. All policies and 

procedures below are in accordance with Title 34; Subtitle B; 

Chapter VI; Part 668 of the Electronic Code of Federal Regulations 

(eCFR). 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

3.7   Withdrawal Overview 

3.7.1   Official Withdrawal 

3.7.2.a Unofficial Withdrawal 

3.7.2.b Withdrawals Involving Modules 

3.7.3.a  Institutional Refunds 

3.7.3.b Provisions Governing State of Mississippi Aid Programs  

  3.7.4  Office of Financial Aid Withdrawal Procedures 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 “F” – Failed 

 “I” - Incomplete 

 “W” – Withdrawal 

DOE – U.S. Department of Education 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

HELP – Mississippi Higher Education Legislative Plan for Needy Students 

 MTAG – Mississippi Tuition Assistance Grant 

 MESG – Mississippi Eminent Scholars Grant 

OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

SEOG – Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant 

 TEACH – Teacher Education Assistance for College and Higher Education Grant  

UM – University of Mississippi 



Part 3.7 Withdrawal Overview 

 

There are financial ramifications when a student withdraws after receiving aid.  They 

may be required to repay all or a prorated portion of funds, or may become ineligible for 

aid in future terms.  Students are considered to have “withdrawn” if they do not complete 

all the days in in the enrollment period that they were scheduled to complete.   

 

There are several ways to identify withdrawals for purposes of this policy: 

 

 An official withdrawal is defined as dropping all credit hours down to zero during 
the course of a semester or term, which provides formal notification to the Office 

of the Registrar that attendance has ceased.  This definition does not apply to 

situations where individual courses are dropped while overlapping enrollment is 

still being maintained in other classes.   

 

 Because the OFA rolls mini-sessions (also known as “modules”) into a combined 
term for Fall (Fall 1, Fall 2, and the regular full-length Fall Semester), Spring 

(Winter Intersession plus Spring 1, Spring 2, and the regular Spring Semester) and 

Summer (May Intersession, First Summer, Full Summer, Second Summer, and 

August Intersession), withdrawal also occurs when a student completes one or 

more modules but fails to enroll in a subsequent module where attendance had 

been expected (and aid had been awarded on that basis).  This definition applies 

only to Federal Title IV aid programs (Pell Grant, SEOG, TEACH, Work-Study, 

Direct Loans, Perkins Loan, and PLUS loans). 

 

 Unofficial withdrawals occur when students simply stop attending classes during 
a term. Although the students did not formally withdraw from UM, they did not 

complete the period of enrollment for which federal aid was disbursed.  This 

definition also applies only to Federal Title IV aid programs (Pell Grant, SEOG, 

TEACH, Work-Study, Direct Loans, Perkins Loan, and PLUS loans). 

If a student is withdrawing from UM and has received financial aid, the following actions 

should be completed (as applicable):   

 Complete “Loan Exit Counseling” if the student has received any of the 
following:  Stafford Loan, Direct Loan, TEACH Grant (since the award can 

convert to a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Loan if the student does not satisfy 

the service obligation), Health Profession Student Loan (HPSL), and/or 

Perkins Loan (see http://finaid.olemiss.edu/online-loan-exit-counseling-2/). 

 Read explanations of federal requirements for returning unearned Federal 
Title IV financial aid, including Federal Pell Grant, SEOG, TEACH, Direct 

Loans, and PLUS loans.  Federal Work-Study is exempt from this rule.  (See 

policy “3.2 Return of Federal Title IV Funds”.) 

 Read the consequences for failure to maintain appropriate progress towards a 
degree, which may impact future eligibility for Federal Title IV aid programs 

http://finaid.olemiss.edu/online-loan-exit-counseling-2/


as well as Sumners Grants and McKinstry Loans.  (See policy “1.2 

Satisfactory Academic Progress”.) 

 Read regulations below about potential loss of eligibility for State of 
Mississippi aid programs, including MTAG/MESG. 

 Be aware that withdrawing (either officially or unofficially) can adversely 
affect institutional scholarships (e.g. Academic Excellence) for the next term 

of attendance. 

Correspondence: 

 

Please note that all correspondence from the OFA will be carried out through email. 

Therefore, the student is responsible for checking his or her Ole Miss email account 

regularly.  If the student does not use their Ole Miss account, it is recommended that he 

or she forward it to an active email account. 

 

 

Part 3.7.1 Official Withdrawal 

 

Students should contact the Office of the Registrar when they cease enrollment to ensure 

that proper notification is given to UM about the decision.  Further instructions can then 

be provided.  Please refer to http://registrar.olemiss.edu/withdrawal-from-the-university/ 

regarding the process to follow.   

 

Official withdrawal dates are determined by the Office of the Registrar.  This date 

impacts the return/refund requirements (below) for institutional, state, and federal aid.   

 

 

 

Part 3.7.2.a Unofficial Withdrawal 

 

DOE also requires institutions to identify “unofficial” withdrawals – specifically to 

determine whether Federal Title IV aid eligibility has been impacted.   

 

In these cases, the withdrawal date will be determined as the date in which UM became 

aware that enrollment ceased.  However, UM is not mandated by DOE or any outside 

agency to take attendance.  As a result, the OFA will attempt to retroactively identify 

students who have unofficially withdrawn by running reports at the end of each term.  

Students who receive all “F”, “W”, and/or “I” grades are flagged in order to determine 

whether or not they ceased attendance.  If so, they may be responsible for returning all or 

part of the Federal Title IV funds that they received for the term.   

 

Because UM designates 3 different types of F grade as noted below, any student 

identified as having all “No Attendance” F’s at the end of the term will be considered a 

“no show”.  Since attendance is required to document eligibility for Title IV aid, all funds 

must be returned for these students.  However, these courses will not be included in the 

determination of Satisfactory Academic Progress.  

http://registrar.olemiss.edu/withdrawal-from-the-university/


 Earned F- The student “finished” the class.  It confirms that the student is not a 
withdrawal.  

 

 Abandonment F – The student did have attendance confirmed in the course at 
least one time, but they did not finish the class.  The instructor must document 

the latest date of an academically-related activity that is not on record.  (Please 

note that the following examples are not considered academically related 

activities and cannot be used to document attendance:  participation in academic 

advising, logging into an online class without active engagement, simply living 

in institutional housing or participating in a meal plan without going to classes.) 

OFA staff members will follow up with instructors to clarify the reporting 

requirements as needed.  

 

 No Attendance F – No attendance was ever confirmed for the course.   
 

Any student with at least one “earned” F grade has completed the payment period and 

will not be subject to R2T4.  However, if these students had any coursed that received 

“No Attendance” F grades, then aid may need to be recalculated if the enrollment level 

on which an award was originally based is no longer substantiated by the evidence.   

 

For all other students flagged through the unofficial withdrawal process who abandoned 

their classes after attending at least one time, the transcript will be examined for any “No 

Attendance” F grades to determine whether the aid needs to be recalculated because the 

enrollment level must be changed to exclude those classes.  Once that determination is 

made, the OFA will perform the R2T4 calculation based on the mid-point of the 

semester, unless the student has documented attendance past the mid-point.  

 

Students who will be required to return any portion of their aid package will be sent a 

written letter (to their permanent home address) and an email (to their UM email account) 

notifying them of their status and that financial aid paybacks will be issued.  The 

letter/email will also inform the student of the right to dispute the determination.  The 

student may request the opportunity to document a later date by contacting an instructor 

who can substantiate the claim.  The instructor must provide this information directly to 

OFA.  

 

 

Part 3.7.2.b Withdrawals Involving Modules 

 

For terms comprised of modules for Federal Title IV eligibility, if a student ceases 

attendance in a scheduled module, or fails to enroll as expected in a module, they can be 

considered a withdrawal if they do not provide written confirmation of future attendance 

in that combined term.  If the student subsequently returns and begins attendance later in 

the period, any Return of Title IV Funds calculation that was performed can be undone.  

 

 

 



Part 3.7.3.a Institutional Refunds 

 

Students are allowed a 100% tuition refund if they withdraw from UM within the refund 

period(s).  Refer to the Academic Calendar for the appropriate dates.   

 

Failure to withdraw within the refund period means that the charges for tuition and fees 

posted to the student's account will stand unless an exception is authorized by the Office 

of the Bursar.  For further information regarding the Bursar’s refund policy, see 

http://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara

=10644381.   

 

 

Part 3.7.3.b Provisions Governing State of Mississippi Aid Programs 

 

A student must maintain continuous enrollment of not less than two semesters in each 

successive academic year to maintain their eligibility for state grant programs (including 

MTAG, MESG, and HELP) unless granted an exception for cause.  UM is unable to 

make exceptions to this rule; authorization must be obtained by the State of Mississippi 

Office of Financial Aid only. Examples of exceptions for cause may include personal 

injury or death of an immediate family member, participation in a cooperative program, 

internship or foreign study program.  

 

Failure to maintain continuous enrollment can result in the student being ineligible to 

receive funds during the next semester of full-time enrollment in a regular academic year. 

 

 

Part 3.7.4 Office of Financial Aid Withdrawal Procedures 

 

Below are the procedures for determining refunds for students with financial aid: 

1. For students who receive any type of aid have their schedule cancelled (withdraw 
before the first day of class), all aid that has disbursed must be returned to each 

aid program in full. 

 

2. The OFA will complete a Return of Title IV Funds calculation for all withdrawn 
students (including military withdrawals and deceased students) who receive any 

of the following:  Federal Pell, SEOG, TEACH, Direct Subsidized and 

Unsubsidized Loans, PLUS Loans, and/or Grad PLUS Loans.  This requirement 

applies to both official and unofficial withdrawals, as well as failure to enroll in 

anticipated modules. 

 

3. If a student withdraws during the institutional refund period, all institutional 
scholarships that have credited to the student account must be repaid in full.    

 

4. During the institutional refund period, the OFA may return disbursed McKinstry 
Loans, Johnson Civil Engineering Loans, Scribner Loans, or other institutional 

http://registrar.olemiss.edu/academic-calendar-menu/
http://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10644381
http://secure4.olemiss.edu/umpolicyopen/ShowDetails.jsp?istatPara=1&policyObjidPara=10644381


loans to the appropriate university account(s) if a tuition refund is given for a 

withdrawal and a credit balance results. 

 

5. There will be no paybacks done on any state aid for withdrawals. 
 

6. There will be no paybacks done for institutional rollover scholarships (Academic 
Excellence, General Endowed, etc.) for withdrawals after the institutional refund 

period ends.  Students receiving those scholarships must complete a minimum of 

24 hours during fall-spring for renewal. 

 

7. If a student receives a miscellaneous (outside) scholarship and withdraws after 
classes begin, there will be no payback unless the donor of the scholarship 

specifically requests one. 

 

 

The Office of the Bursar will work in partnership with the OFA to identify transactions 

affecting financial aid accounts. 


