
 

 

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

       
 

 

Policy Name:   iStudy (Correspondence Courses) 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies and 

procedures for iStudy coursework. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply with 

administrative and regulatory requirements. 

 

Policy Contents: 

    

10.0   iStudy (Correspondence Courses) Overview 

10.1   Requirements for Federal Title IV Financial Aid 

10.2   Registration for Students Using iStudy hours for Financial Aid 

10.3   iStudy Enrollment Status 

10.4   iStudy Cost of Attendance 

10.5                 Disbursement of Title IV Financial Aid 

10.6   Failure to Complete Coursework 

10.7   Requirements for Institutional Financial Aid 

10.8   Requirements for State Financial Aid 

10.9  Requirements for Other Aid 

 

Definitions and Terms:    

 

       COA Cost of Attendance (also known as the student budget) 

 FSEOG Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant     

 iStudy Independent Study 

 OFA Office of Financial Aid 

       TEACH Federal Teacher Education Assistance for College and Higher Education Grant 

       UM University of Mississippi 

 

  

 

  



Part 10.0 iStudy (Correspondence Courses) Overview  

 

UM offers iStudy—correspondence (or “home study”) courses—for which the university 

provides instructional materials and exams for students who are studying independently and do 

not physically attend classes.  These courses are different from traditional semester seat courses 

and online courses in that iStudy courses are self-paced, making them more flexible. They are 

also distinct from Independent Study courses, which are faculty-guided and take place on 

campus.  iStudy coursed do, however, have certain deadlines.  Classes are provided primarily at 

the undergraduate level, but there are certain graduate level courses offered as well. Please 

reference www.outreach.olemiss.edu/istudy/ for full listings. 

UM students may be able to use some types of financial aid to pay for iStudy courses. However, 

there are restrictions and requirements placed on these students, and they must work with the 

OFA to determine their eligibility – see below. Also note that iStudy enrollment will not count in 

the full-time enrollment calculation for most institutional aid eligibility.  

Students have the option of taking iStudy courses as either Flex (year-long) or Semester (also 

referred to as term-based). Flex classes allow students to have up to 12 months to finish their 

coursework. Semester classes follow the university’s academic calendar and are available for 

fall, spring, or the full summer term. 

For students who are otherwise full-time, adding Semester iStudy courses that bring them up to 

19 hours would not yield additional tuition charges. They would pay the standard fixed "flat rate" 

for full-time students (taking 12-19 hours). 

 

There is an additional tuition charge for Flex iStudy courses regardless of semester enrollment.  

The nonresident fee is not applied to Flex iStudy courses. 

 

 

Part 10.1 Requirements for Federal Title IV Financial Aid  

Students who wish to receive Federal Title IV financial aid (such as Direct Loans, Pell Grant, or 

FSEOG) during a period of enrollment that includes correspondence courses must meet the 

following requirements that would not otherwise apply to iStudy students:   

 The student must be admitted as a degree-seeking student at UM. 
 

 The iStudy course(s) must apply toward the student’s academic program or be 
allowable remedial work (as confirmed by the appropriate dean’s office). 

 

 The student must enroll and complete the correspondence course within the semester 
(or the combined summer term) for which the hours are being used for aid purposes.  

(Although traditional iStudy enrollment is flexible and self-paced, courses being 

considered for federal aid purposes must be Semester courses in order to ensure 

proper monitoring.) 

 

http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/istudy/


 

 Reach the midpoint of the course(s) by the established deadline (determined by 
iStudy Department).   

For any students enrolling only in iStudy courses, the OFA will verify with the iStudy Office that 

the student is not incarcerated because awarding restrictions apply to incarcerated students.  A 

student is considered to be incarcerated if he/she is serving a criminal sentence in a federal, state, 

or local penitentiary, prison, jail, reformatory, work farm, or similar correction institution 

(whether it is operated by the government or a contractor).  

Incarcerated students may be eligible for FSEOG (depending on available funding).  They are 

eligible for Pell Grants if not incarcerated in a federal or state penal institution.  They are not 

eligible for federal student loans.  Similarly, a parent is not eligible for a Direct PLUS loan if 

he/she is incarcerated. 

Part 10.2 Registration for Students Using iStudy Hours for Financial Aid  

Registration for Semester iStudy courses opens at the same time as registration for on-campus 

courses. Registration in all applicable terms (Fall/Spring/Summer) closes on the last day to add 

an on-campus course for that term. Semester iStudy courses follow all regular semester deadlines 

per the UM academic calendar. Registration for Flex iStudy courses may occur at any time 

throughout the year, regardless of the semester calendar, and they do not count towards 

enrollment for federal or state financial aid eligibility purposes (and most institutional aid). 

Students using correspondence courses for financial aid purposes will have their iStudy 

application reviewed by OFA (students will also be required to confim that they have read the 

“Using Financial Aid for iStudy Courses” page at https://finaid.olemiss.edu/iStudy/).  This is to 

ensure that the student is fully aware of and has agreed to the financial aid stipulations.  Online 

applications for iStudy courses are available at http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/istudy/. 

Part 10.3 iStudy Enrollment Status 

Most iStudy courses are 3 credit hours, similar to regular classes, and are treated the same for 

enrollment purposes except for the following situations:  

 For purposes of Federal Pell Grant (or the Iraq & Afghanistan Service Grant), students 
enrolled only in iStudy courses will be considered to be no more than half-time students, 

even if they are enrolled in 12 hours of iStudy courses. 

 

 For purposes of Federal Pell Grant (or the Iraq & Afghanistan Service Grant), enrollment 
that combines iStudy and regular coursework generally cannot count iStudy hours as 

more than the number of credit hours of regular coursework in which the student is 

enrolled. The exception is if the student is enrolled at least half-time in correspondence 

courses, then the student would be paid as at least half-time student, regardless of regular 

credit hour enrollment.  Also, a student will be paid as a less-than-half-time student for 

http://www.outreach.olemiss.edu/istudy/


any combination of regular and correspondence hours that is less than 6 credit hours or 

the appropriate equivalent of half-time.  Refer to the chart below regarding the enrollment 

status for students enrolled in both iStudy and regular coursework: 

 

 

Part 10.4 iStudy Cost of Attendance  
 

The COA for a student who is taking only iStudy classes will be limited to required tuition and 

fees, with an allowance for books and supplies if needed for the classes.  Students taking a 

combination of both Semester iStudy and regular courses (on-campus and/or distance education 

courses) will have their budgets adjusted to reflect that iStudy charges do not include Capital 

Improvement fees.  

The housing allowance in the COA will be zeroed for individuals identified as being in the 

follow categories: 

 

 Independent students who receive, or whose spouses receive, a military housing 
allowance (Basic Allowance for Housing, or “BAH”) or who live on a military base. 

 Dependent students who are living with parents who are receive BAH, or who live on a 

military base.  

 

Part 10.5 Disbursement of Title IV Financial Aid  

 
For students who are not otherwise enrolled in at least 12 regular hours and whose iStudy course(s) 
count towards enrollment for federal aid eligibility purposes, no Title IV financial aid will be released 
until the student reaches the midpoint of each correspondence course.  
 
The midpoint is determined by the iStudy Department.  The OFA will release funds to the student’s 
bursar account once confirmation is received.  To be valid for federal financial aid, the midpoint must be 
reached by no later than the established deadline.  Please see part 10.1. 
 

Part 10.6 Failure to Complete Coursework  

Semester iStudy courses should be completed by the last class day of the enrollment term.  Not 

completing, or failing a correspondence course, may cause changes in the amount of financial aid 

that was awarded and students may have to return funds to the University. These scenarios may 

also impact future financial aid awards. 



Semester iStudy students using financial aid to pay their tuition may have the option of 

approaching their instructor for an Incomplete (I) mark.  If an “I” mark for an undergraduate 

student has not been changed to a regular grade before the course withdrawal deadline (the 30th 

day of classes) of the next regular semester (excluding summer terms), the “I” automatically 

changes to an “F” and is computed in the GPA. 

For Flex iStudy courses, students must complete correspondence coursework within one calendar 

year (but may purchase 1 three-month extension).  Not completing, or failing the correspondence 

course may impact future financial aid awards. 

 

Part 10.7 Requirements for Institutional Financial Aid 

In general, enrollment in iStudy courses will not count in the full-time enrollment calculation for 

full-time scholarship eligibility (for awards such as Academic Merit, community college 

recruitment scholarships, and Ole Miss Opportunity).   

There are limited forms of aid that are available for students taking iStudy courses, including 

Faculty/Staff Scholarship, Child of Faculty/Staff Scholarship, and Agency Banked Hours.  Either 

Flex or Semester iStudy courses can qualify for these awards.  Therefore, students may enroll in 

the correspondence courses at any time.  Typically, students are admitted to an academic 

program, but can sometimes qualify as a result of their participation in the UM Independent 

Study program in a non-degree-seeking status. 

 

Part 10.8 Requirements for State of MS Financial Aid 
 

Full-time enrollment for State Aid is 15 credit-hours per semester.  Students must be enrolled in 

15 credit hours at the time of disbursement.  In order for iStudy courses to be counted towards 

the full-time requirement for state aid, the courses must be term-based. 

 

Part 10.9 Requirements for Other Aid 
 

iStudy may also qualify students for outside aid such as veterans education benefits or 

AmeriCorps. For VA Benefits, students should contact the Office of Veteran & Military 

Services.  For AmeriCorps, they should contact AmeriCorps directly about using their benefits at 

UM.  If students are receiving any other funding, they should contact OFA. 


