
 The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 1 
 

Attendance Policy for Online Education 
 
The following statements elaborate upon the University of Mississippi’s general attendance 
policy stated in the Catalog and apply to courses that are delivered online. 
 
The University of Mississippi believes that students must attend class if they are to be well 
prepared for the workplace.  Online courses are no different from traditional classroom courses 
in this regard. Online students are subject to the same attendance policy and procedures as 
traditional students. However, participation is defined in a different manner. 
 
Student attendance in online courses is defined as active participation in the course as 
described in the individual course syllabus.  Unlike Individual Study or iStudy courses, online 
courses will, at a minimum, have weekly mechanisms for student participation no more 
frequently than daily, which can be documented by any or all of the following methods: 
 

 Completion of tests or quizzes 

 Discussion forums 

 Submission/completion of assignments 

 Communication with the instructor 

 Or other course participation 
 
Having these weekly mechanisms in place requires that students attend class each week or as 
specified in the syllabus.  The student is solely responsible for checking updates related to the 
course.  If a student fails to meet attendance requirements as stated in the syllabus, he or she 
will be given an absence.  Aside from the learning opportunities missed due to absences from 
class, there are cases when a class absence or multiple absences may result in a student being 
dropped from a course.  See the course syllabus and the University of Mississippi’s policy on 
Credits and Grades for more information.  In case of an anticipated absence, such as military 
deployment, a student should contact the instructor in advance. 
 
Note: Nonattendance may affect financial aid resulting in reduction of aid, financial aid 
probation or financial aid suspension.  Refer to the Office Financial Aid for more information. 


