
 The University of Mississippi  

External Letters of Evaluation for Promotion and Tenure 
 
The University of Mississippi regards tenure and promotion as essential elements of maintaining a 
strong environment for teaching and scholarly research. A vital aspect of the tenure and promotion 
process is the evaluation of a candidate’s accomplishments within, and contributions to, his or her field 
by reviewers external to the University. The purpose of these external letters of evaluation is to provide 
an independent and unbiased assessment of the national and international reputation of the candidate 
seeking tenure or promotion.  Please note that this policy applies only to faculty reviews that require 
external letters.  
 
Although an individual college/school, department, or program may develop separate policies and 
procedures related to additional letters of evaluation, this University policy sets forth the minimum 
requirements that must be followed for independent, external letters of evaluation. For a candidate’s 
dossier to move forward, a minimum of four independent external letters of evaluation are required. If 
more letters are required or received by the unit, all must become a part of the candidate’s dossier. 
External evaluation letters must be written by evaluators within the candidate’s field at peer institutions 
who hold academic rank at or above the rank to which the candidate aspires (or currently holds if the 
candidate is seeking tenure only). Acceptable independent external evaluators are those without a close 
personal or professional relationship with the candidate. Examples of unacceptable external evaluators 
may include, but are not limited to, dissertation/thesis advisors, former professors or students, graduate 
student colleagues at institutions from which the candidate received a degree, faculty colleagues at 
institutions at which the candidate was employed, co-authors or co-investigators, and personal friends. If 
the candidate’s field is very specialized or narrow such that external evaluators must be drawn from 
those with a close professional relationship, the unit must include a justification that will appear in the 
candidate’s dossier to explain the exception to this policy. Such exceptions should be rare. Having 
served together with the candidate on national committees, study sections, or conference organizations 
does not preclude serving as an external evaluator.  Because every possible conflict of interest may be 
unknown, external reviewers themselves are asked to refuse an assignment if an actual conflict of 
interest exists. 
 
Units may determine appropriate measures of choosing external evaluators, including the number of 
names the candidate may submit for consideration. Candidates may neither personally solicit external 
evaluators nor be a part of the final determination of external evaluators, and the final list of those 
chosen as external evaluators may not be shared with the candidate. The dean of the appropriate 
school/college, or his/her designee, must review the list of external evaluators, but such review is limited 
to ensuring that the external reviewer criteria of both the unit and University, as described above, have 
been met. Once a final list of external evaluators is determined, the department chair, or designee, will 
contact all evaluators requesting an assessment of the candidate’s contributions in research and/or 
creative activity. Each evaluator should receive at least the CV and evidence of scholarly/creative 
activity from the dossier under consideration, copies of the appropriate unit and University policies, and 
the list of items the external evaluator is to include in his/her evaluation letter. The solicitation letter to 
each external evaluator also must include a request for the external evaluator to send, based on unit 
policy, his/her CV in long or short form, or appropriate bio sketch. Of the external evaluation letters 
received, as noted above, all must be included in the dossier, and under this policy, no more than half of 
those letters included in the dossier may be from an evaluator recommended by the candidate.  
 

Page 1 of 1 
 


