
The University of Mississippi 

Page 1 of 2 

Amendments to Existing Protocols 
 

Summary/Purpose: Provides procedures for the different types of amendment review to animal study 
protocols.  
 
BACKGROUND  
Protocols must meet all federal regulations. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) has 
the responsibility to ensure that all animal use activity meets federal law, Public Health Service policy, and 
accreditation standards. All animals maintained by The University of Mississippi (UM) must be covered by 
an active, IACUC-approved protocol. This policy addresses amendments to those protocols. Principal 
Investigators wanting to make any changes to an IACUC approved protocol must obtain IACUC approval in 
compliance with PHS Policy (IV, B, 7) and the AWAR (§2.31, c, 7). 
 
RESEARCHER RESPONSIBILITIES  
The Principal Investigator (PI) should work with the IACUC to ensure that protocols are active and current 
for any anticipated or ongoing animal use. Any changes must be reviewed and approved by the IACUC 
office before being implemented.  Proposed modifications should fit with the objectives, purpose, or aims 
stated in the original protocol. Otherwise, the IACUC may require a new protocol. 
 
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW TYPE 
 
The IACUC has established the following guidelines (in compliance with PHS Guidance NOT-OD-14-126) 
to determine whether a requested modification is a minor or significant change to an active IACUC approved 
protocol.  Please note that the example lists are not exhaustive, but are intended as guides to changes the 
IACUC might regard as minor or significant. 
 

1. Administrative Review  
a. Some changes to active, approved protocols may be reviewed by a single IACUC 

member, usually the IACUC Research Compliance Specialist (RCS).  These changes 
include the following: 

i. Additions and deletions of personnel, other than the principal investigator. 
ii. Addition of non-USDA animals in compliance with PHS Policy (IV, D, 1, a), 

provided the number of animals to be added is <20% of the originally 
approved number (or <3 animals for projects with fewer than 20 total animals 
approved).  Justification for the additions must be provided and approved. 

iii. Change in funding source. 
iv. Change in contact information. 
v. Minor typographical or grammatical error corrections. 

vi. Addition of supporting protocol information (e.g., updated permits). 
b. Any time the RCS is unsure whether a change may be administratively reviewed, the 

RCS will contact the Chair and Attending Veterinarian for guidance. 
c. Investigators may use fewer animals than approved.  This does not require IACUC 

approval, notification, consultation, or administrative handling. 
 

2. Chair and/or Attending Veterinarian (AV) Review 
a. Other minor changes to active, approved protocols that do not have a substantial 

impact on the health and well-being of research animals or that may decrease the 
potential for pain or distress may be reviewed by the Chair and/or AV.  These 
changes include the following: 



The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 2 

i. Transfer of animals to another protocol where animals (same stock/strain) are 
already approved on that study.  This change may also be approved by the 
Animal Care Supervisor. 

ii. Change in stock or strain of the already-approved species. 
iii. Adding or changing location where animal procedures are conducted. 
iv. Euthanasia procedure changes to any method approved in the AVMA 

Guidelines. 
v. Changes in anesthesia, analgesia, sedation, or experimental substances. 

vi. Dose volume, route, and frequency increases. 
vii. Duration, frequency, type, or number of procedures performed on an animal. 

b. The Chair and/or AV may at any time decide that a change considered minor be 
reviewed by DR or Full Committee review. 
 

3. DR or Full Committee Review   
a. Significant changes to active, approved protocols must go through the same process 

of review as new protocols.  The changes will be submitted to the full IACUC for 
review.  During the review period, members may accept the amendment as 
appropriate for Designated Member Review or request a Full Committee Review.  
These changes include, but are not limited to, the following: 

i. Principal Investigator change. 
ii. Use of hazardous agents in animal procedures (e.g., chemical or biological or 

test compounds). 
iii. Change in study objectives (may require new protocol). 
iv. Procedures that will result in greater pain, distress, or degree of invasiveness. 
v. Changes in method of anesthesia, sedation, analgesia, or experimental 

substances not considered minor. 
vi. Changes in feeding that are significantly different that those described in the 

original protocol. 
vii. Changes in housing and/or use of animals in a location that is not part of the 

animal program overseen by the IACUC. 
viii. Physical restraint of conscious animals. 

ix. Changes in protocol where death becomes the experimental end point. 
x. Changes in protocol that would eliminate or restrict an animal’s access to 

veterinary care. 
xi. Protocol change from non-surgery to surgery, from minor to major surgery, 

from non-survival to survival surgery, or from single to multiple survival 
surgery. 

xii. Changes in euthanasia to a method not specifically approved in the AVMA 
Guidelines. 

xiii. Change in species. 
xiv. Changes that impact personnel safety. 
xv. Addition of USDA animals. 

xvi. Addition of non-USDA animals when the number to be added is >20% of the 
original number (or >3 animals for projects with fewer than 20 total animals 
approved). 

 
 
 
 


