
The University of Mississippi 
 

University Organizational Conduct Process 
DSA.SC.300.050 

Student Organizational Conduct Consulting Committee 

The Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct, acting on behalf of the Dean of 
Students, is responsible for the management of the student organizational conduct 
process and acts as judicial officers for the case. The Student Organizational Conduct 
Consulting Committee (SOCCC) maintains the responsibility of aiding the Office of 
Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct (CRSC) in ensuring that each Student 
Organization receives a fair and timely investigation and process. 

The Dean of Students (or designee) oversees membership of the committee. Generally, 
the committee will consist of at least one representative from the Office of Leadership 
and Advocacy, Office of Fraternal Leadership and Learning, and Department of Campus 
Recreation; in conjunction with the CRSC staff and the Dean of Student (or designee). 

The primary goal of the committee is to act as consultants for CRSC in the policy, 
procedure and process that addresses Student Organizations. The SOCCC acts as a 
consulting group for CRSC in decisions regarding the transition from incident to case 
file, investigation to adjudication, and the creation of effective and consistent 
sanctioning. 

1. Notice of Allegations 
 
Organizations 
When an allegation is received against a student organization, the Office of Conflict 
Resolution and Student Conduct will send the organization written notification. This 
notice will inform the organization of the allegations and the specific potential policy, 
rule, or regulations the student organization may be charged with having violated. 
Generally, the notice will be sent to the organization’s president. Also, the notice will 
include the time, date, and location of an intake meeting to respond to the allegations. 
 
Advisors 
In addition to providing notice of allegations to the student organization, the Office of 
Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct will notify the organizational advisor on 
record of the allegations and the specific policy, rule, or regulations the student 
organization may be charged with having violated. The notice will include the time, 
date, and location of an intake meeting to respond to the allegations. 
 
National or International Organization 
If an allegation includes dangerous organizational misconduct and/or a serious injury 
or death, the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct will notify the national 
or international organization of the allegations and the specific potential policy, rule, 
or regulations the student organization may be charged with having violated. Also, 
national or international organizations will be notified if an organization is issued 
interim measures under DSA.SC.300.030. 
 



The University of Mississippi 
 

2. Intake Meeting 
 
During the intake meeting, the student organization will be informed of the conduct 
process, the incident and potential charges. If it is appropriate for the incident to be 
resolved informally through alternative dispute resolution, the Office of Conflict 
Resolution and Student Conduct or Dean of Students Office will work with the 
organization to develop an agreement, and the case will be closed as soon as the 
terms of the agreement are met. If informal resolution is not an option, based on the 
serious nature of the allegations or the organization’s response, the incident will be 
resolved through an administrative agreement or forwarded to the University Judicial 
Council or appropriate governing council. 
 

3. Resolution Options 
 
Administrative Agreement 
Generally, if an organization accepts responsibility for the allegations described in the 
complaint, the organization can enter into an administrative agreement with the Office 
of Conflict Resolution or the Office of the Dean of Students depending on which office 
managed the case. This agreement will include sanctions and educational measures the 
organization agrees to complete. 
 
Hearing 
Generally, if a student organization denies responsibility for the allegations in the 
complaint, the case will be forwarded to the University Judicial Council, and the 
hearing process will be followed as outlined in University of Mississippi Policy, 
DSA.SC.300.010. 
 
Appeal 
Under certain conditions, the organization may appeal the findings and/or sanctions 
of the hearing board. The process of appeal is outlined in University of Mississippi 
Policy DSA.SC.300.010. 


	1. Notice of Allegations
	Advisors
	National or International Organization
	2. Intake Meeting
	3. Resolution Options
	Administrative Agreement
	Hearing
	Appeal


