
  
 

 
   
  
   

 

The University	  of Mississippi

Initiation of	  University Conduct Proceedings for Student
Organizations
DSA.SC.300.045

Summary/Purpose: To inform	  community members how to initiate the conduct
process for behavior involving student	  organizations.

Any person may submit a report alleging a violation of University policies. Complaints
may be submitted, in any form	  to the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct.
Reports can be submitted anonymously by contacting the Office of Conflict Resolution	  
and Student	  Conduct.	  

Upon receipt of a complaint, a representative from	  the Office of Conflict Resolution and
Student Conduct, Office of the Dean of Students, University Police Department, and two
designated	  students	  identified	  by	  the	  Office	  of the Dean of Students will meet to review
the complaint. After reviewing the complaint, the representatives will make the
following recommendations to the Director of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct:

1.	 Dismiss the complaint; 
2.	 Forward the complaint to the Student Organizational Advisory Committee or 


appropriate governing council;
 
3.	 Resolve the incident informally with alternative dispute resolution; 
4.	 Initiate an investigation of the allegations in the complaint; or 
5.	 File formal conduct charges against the organization.  

If the complaint involves behavior of a serious nature, representatives may recommend
to the Director of Conflict	  Resolution	  and Student	  Conduct	  that	  the Dean	  of Students
issue an interim	  measures under DSA.SC.300.030 to limit or suspend the privileges of
the student	  organization.	  

The Office	  of Conflict Resolution	  and	  Student Conduct will oversee the	  conduct proces
for organizational misconduct that involves violations of University policies, or
organizational misconduct that may result in an	  organization	  no longer	  being	  recognize
by the University.	   Depending	  on	  the nature of the incident,	  the Office of Conflict	  
Resolution may forward a case to the Office of the Dean of Students to adjudicate. The
decision regarding	  whether	  the	  Office of Conflict Resolution	  and	  Student Conduct or the	  
Dean of Students Office will address an incident will be determined by the Director of
the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student Conduct. This determination is final and
will be made after consulting with	  the	  Office	  of the	  Dean	  of Students.



 
  
  
   

 

 
 

  
 

 
 

 
 

 
  

 
   

 

The University	  of Mississippi

Investigation

Upon receipt of a report alleging that an organization is acting in a manner inconsistent
with community values and university policy, the Office of Conflict Resolution and
Student Conduct	  will initiate an investigation. The investigation may include, but is not
limited, to the following:

1.	 Interviewing members, or potential members, of the organization; 
2.	 Requesting and reviewing organizational records and documents; and/or 
3.	 Interviewing individuals who are not affiliated with the organization who have 

pertinent information relating to the report. 

The Office	  of Conflict Resolution	  and	  Student Conduct or the	  Office	  of the	  Dean	  of
Students will schedule an intake meeting, under DSA.SC.300.050	  (2), with	  the	  president
of the	  organization.	   The organization	  has	  the	  right to	  have	  an	  advisor	  present at all
meetings and proceedings; however, the advisor cannot directly participate in
proceedings, but can advise the organization and help them	  prepare for meetings	  and	  
proceedings.

Organizational or Individual Conduct

If an incident involves individual student action that may violate University policy, or
local, state, and federal regulations, individual students may be subject to University
conduct charges and proceedings under DSA.SC.300.010.

Examples of when a student organization will be subject to conduct charges and
proceedings include, but are not limited to, when:

1.	 One or more of its officers are acting within the scope of their duties and 
commit a violation; 

2.	 One or more of its members are acting within the scope of their committee 
assignment and commit a violation; 

3.	 One or more of it members commit a violation as part of an activity or 
assignment approved or funded by the organization, or an individual acting on 
the organizations behalf; 

4.	 The violation occurs as the result of an event endorsed, sponsored, or co-
sponsored by the organization; 

5.	 A significant number of its members engage in, permit, or encourage the 
commission of a violation; or 

6.	 The incident took place at an organizational facility and members of the 
organization knew, or should have known, the conduct was occurring but did 
not take adequate steps to prevent or report the behavior. 


