
 

 

        
 

 
 

  
 

 
 

 
 

  
 

 
   

  
 

 
 

  
  

 
   

 
 

   
 

 
  

 
 

 
 

   

   
 

 
 

  
 
 
 

The University of Mississippi 

Game Day and Game Day Activities and Events
 
DSA.SC.200.095
 

Purpose/Summary: To inform students of their duty to honor University policy on game days 
and at game related activities and events. 

On game day and during game related activities and events, students will demonstrate respect for 
the dignity of each person, civility, and integrity by honoring University policies.  Examples of 
game day and game related activities include, but are not limited to, the following: pre-game 
activities and events, being present at game venues, walking to and from game venues, being 
present in the Grove on game days, walking to and from the Grove on game days, post-game 
activities or events, etc.. On game day and at game related activities and events, students arrested 
or issued a University citation for criminal behavior by the University Police Department will be 
subject to student conduct charges and proceedings. 

If the receipt of a University citation leads to a student being found responsible for violating a 
related University policy through the University conduct process, the student will receive the 
following minimum sanctions: 

Student’s first offense – A fine not to exceed $200 and/or community service, and students will 
receive a warning. 

Student’s second offense – A fine not to exceed $225 and/or community service, and students 
must complete a fan conduct course and pay related fees associated with the course.  The fan 
conduct course must be completed before students can attend the next athletic or sporting event.  
A certificate of completion must be submitted to the Office of Conflict Resolution and Student 
Conduct at least 48 hours before the start of the next athletic or sporting event.  Students who do 
not complete the conduct course will no longer be able to attend athletic and sporting events until 
the course is completed.  Also, students may be subject to additional conduct charges and 
proceedings. 

Student’s third offense – A fine not to exceed $500 and/or community service, and students 
will lose their privilege to attend all athletic and sporting events for the remainder of the 
academic year. When a third offense occurs in the summer or late in the Spring semester, the 
student’s loss of privileges may extend to the following academic year. 

Students will receive the above sanctions, in addition to the Minimum Sanctions for Alcohol and 
Other Drugs under DSA.SC.300.025, if applicable. 


