
The University of Mississippi 

Disposal of University Equipment 

 

Summary/Purpose: To remove non-functional or surplus equipment from a department 

 

A UM Property Disposal Report must be completed and forwarded to the Property Office for 

removal of non-functional or surplus equipment.  Upon receipt of a completed form, the Property 

Office & Receiving will contact the department to make arrangements for the pick-up of the 

equipment.  If the equipment is to be delivered to the Property Office & Receiving, a completed 

UM Property Disposal Report must be turned in at time of delivery.  Each form must be signed 

by the department head, dean, or chair.   

Prior to submitting a UM Property Disposal Report, it is the department’s responsibility to 

certify that the property is: 

1. University owned,  

2. Not accountable to a current grant or contract. 

 

If the equipment being removed contains coolant, a notification must be submitted to Facilities 

Management to have the coolant removed prior to being taken to the Property Office & 

Receiving.  The cost for this service is paid by the surrendering department.  A form certifying 

the coolant has been removed must accompany the equipment when it is taken to the Property 

Office & Receiving.  

 

The Property Office will remove the inventoried equipment from the surrendering department’s 

inventory and place it on the Salvage/Surplus Property inventory in accordance with its transfer 

procedures. The equipment shall remain on the Salvage/Surplus property inventory until it has 

been transferred to another department within the University, to an approved State-Funded 

Entity, or it has been decommissioned by the University’s Salvage Committee.  The Property 

Office fully supports the reuse of University equipment. 

If the equipment has reached the end of its useful life as determined by the University’s Salvage 

Committee, the equipment will be decommissioned and properly disposed of.  After disposal, the 

Property Office will remove the asset from the University’s inventory. 

Electronic equipment is disposed of through a certified recycler which has been approved by the 

State of Mississippi in accordance with SB 2754 (now Section 49-2-101 et seq. of the Miss. 

Code Annotated). 

As always, property which may contain or has been exposed to hazardous material should be 

cleared through Laboratory Services prior to requesting removal from department. 

http://billstatus.ls.state.ms.us/documents/2013/pdf/SB/2700-2799/SB2754SG.pdf

