
The University of Mississippi 

Guidelines for Distinguished Professor Award 

I. Introduction  

The University of Mississippi (UM) acknowledges outstanding faculty by conferring the 

honorific title of Distinguished Professor. Appointment as a Distinguished Professor is reserved 

for only the very best faculty members at UM in recognition of sustained excellence, as outlined 

below.  

II. Criteria for Award 

Appointment as Distinguished Professor is a special honor conferred only to full-time 

professorial (tenured or non-tenure track) faculty members in recognition of an extended period 

of exemplary accomplishments in a combination of  

 research or creative achievements,  

 teaching, and  

 professional and public service and/or service to the institution.  

As evidence of exemplary accomplishments in research or creative achievements, a candidate 

should have achieved a significant degree of national or international recognition in his or her 

field, and had a transformative influence on his/her discipline. 

To receive this recognition, a faculty member must hold the position of full professor, with at 

least six years of service at UM. Ordinarily, a candidate must serve six years in the rank of full 

professor before being considered for the Distinguished Professor Award. In exceptional 

circumstances, applications or nominations may be made after fewer than six years at UM and/or 

fewer than six years in rank.  

At the time of initial employment, a faculty member whose preceding employment included a 

faculty rank or title of distinguished professor may be granted the title of distinguished professor 

at UM if so approved by the provost and chancellor based on recommendations of the 

departmental faculty, department chair, dean, and graduate dean, if appropriate.  

The title of Distinguished Professor is intended to be a permanent title through the active 

employment of the recipient at the institution. The honorific title may continue upon retirement 

(e.g., Distinguished Professor Emeritus), if approved by the provost. However, as a consequence 

of annual reviews, a department chair or dean may recommend to the provost that a title be 

rescinded. In such cases, the provost will refer the issue to an appropriate faculty committee.  

To ensure that the title remains a high distinction, no more than two (2) faculty members may be 

appointed as new Distinguished Professors in a given academic year. This number of potential 

new Distinguished Professor appointments does not include any that might occur during a hiring 

process.  



The University of Mississippi 

III. Policies and Timing  

Applications or nominations for the Distinguished Professor award will be due to the Provost 

Office by February 1. The tenured and tenure-track faculty of each school or college shall 

establish criteria/guidelines and procedures for use in considering nominees for Distinguished 

Professor within that school or college. Individual departments may establish criteria for their 

discipline or may use criteria established by the school or college. Selection guidelines will not 

be in conflict with, nor be less rigorous than, the criteria for appointment stated in this document. 

Selection guidelines are subject to approval through normal channels within each school or 

college and the provost.  

IV. Process  

A. Any tenured or tenure-track member of the faculty or any department chair or head, college or 

school dean, the Provost, or the Chancellor, may nominate a Professor for appointment as 

Distinguished Professor. A letter of application or nomination must set forth the achievements of 

distinction that warrant the award and must be submitted to the nominee’s chair.  

B. Working with the nominee, the nominator shall prepare an award application. This will 

include the nominee’s faculty activity reports and current curriculum vitae. It also must include 

at a minimum four (4) external letters of recommendation, in addition to any internal nomination 

letters. The nominator will ordinarily be responsible for soliciting external letters of 

recommendation. It is acceptable for the chair or supervisor to solicit or provide names of 

reviewers. Reviewers should be distinguished professors or people well respected in the 

discipline of the nominee.  

C. The full professors in a unit will vote on forwarding the application of individuals being 

considered for the title of Distinguished Professor.  

D. The application packet must include a letter of recommendation from the respective 

department chair, dean, and the graduate dean, if appropriate.  

E. The provost, in consultation with the Faculty Senate, shall then appoint a committee 

composed of distinguished professors and full professors from diverse disciplines to assist in the 

review and selection of those to be awarded the title of Distinguished Professor.  

F. The provost will recommend a number of awardees not exceeding two (2) faculty members in 

any given academic year, with the final decision made by the chancellor.  

G. For faculty members holding affiliations with multiple academic units, nominations/ 

applications must be considered by each academic unit. If granted, the honorific title will apply 

to each academic area.  

 

 



The University of Mississippi 

H. At any point prior to the chancellor’s recommendation, the nominee may withdraw his/her 

name from further consideration.  

I. The title of Distinguished Professor will apply at the beginning of an academic year.  

J. As a result of an annual performance review or post-tenure review, a department chair or dean 

may recommend to the provost that the title of Distinguished Professor be rescinded beginning 

the next academic year. The provost will then follow the procedure in paragraph “E” to arrive at 

a recommendation to make to the chancellor. If the faculty member wishes to appeal the 

recommendation of the provost, the procedures under Appeals Process in the Tenure Policy shall 

apply.  

V. Benefits  

Any benefits associated with the title should be consistently applied, to the extent possible.  

 


