
The University of Mississippi 

CAMPUS WEAPONS POLICY 
 

Summary/Purpose: Except under the narrow circumstances outlined in this policy, the possession of 
firearms and other weapons on campus is prohibited and may constitute a felony in certain circumstances. 

Under state law, it is a felony in certain instances to possess a firearm, pistol, shotgun, rifle, or other 
weapon on the University of Mississippi campus or on any property owned by or controlled by the 
University (“the University Campus”). Firearms and other weapons are prohibited, except as specified in 
this policy. 

For the purposes of this policy, a weapon is any dangerous instrument used, attempted or threatened to 
be used, or is readily capable of being used to cause death or serious physical injury, including but not 
limited to the following: any gun, shotgun, rifle, pistol or other firearm, any device from which a shot, 
projectile, or other object may be discharged by force (whether operable or inoperable, loaded or 
unloaded), nooses, sticks, poles, pipes, “nun-chucks,” blackjacks, leaded canes, brass or metallic knuckles, 
bowie knives, dirk knives, butcher knives, switchblade knives, daggers, blades, machetes, swords, 
hatchets, metal spikes, bow and arrows, slingshots, metal darts, razors and razor blades (except as used 
for personal grooming), “BB guns,” “air rifles,” “air pistols,” pellet guns, paint ball guns, laser pointers, fire, 
dynamite, dynamite cartridges, bombs, grenades, torches, gun powder, firecrackers, fireworks, mines or 
powerful explosives, and any other pyrotechnic, incendiary or explosive devices. 

The possession of pistols, firearms, or other weapons in any form by any person other than duly 
authorized law enforcement officials, institutional security officials, and other authorized persons is 
prohibited on campus and at institutional off-campus events. The term “other authorized persons” 
includes those individuals authorized by applicable law and by the institutional executive officer or his/her 
designee. “Other authorized persons” also includes those individuals who have in their possession a valid, 
unexpired state enhanced concealed carry firearms permit or the equivalent permit issued by a state with 
a reciprocity agreement with Mississippi. Even so, those individuals possessing such enhanced concealed 
carry permits are not permitted to possess firearms in any non-public institutional locations. Students and 
employees are not authorized to possess firearms on institutional property or at institutional off-campus 
events regardless of possession of firearms permits. Possession of firearms is prohibited in locations 
where same is prohibited by applicable federal law, regardless as to whether those locations are 
designated as public or non-public.  Public campus locations include: 

1. Museums (other than classrooms), 
2. Student Union (other than classrooms), 
3. Library (other than classrooms), 
4. Dining facilities, 
5. Recreation centers (other than classrooms and athletic event venues), 
6. Student health centers, and 
7. Any other locations not designated as “non-public/sensitive”. 



Non-public campus locations include: 

1. Academic classrooms, 
2. Administrative, faculty and staff offices, 
3. Intercollegiate athletic event venues, 
4. Residence halls, fraternity and sorority houses, 
5. Laboratories and research facilities, 
6. Ticketed events (concerts, speakers, etc.),  
7. Patient care areas within a student health center,  
8. Areas/locations within a student health center containing radiological source materials or 

flammable/combustible gases or chemicals,  
9. Areas/locations within a student health center containing confidential student and/or patient 

records, 
10. Preschool/Daycare facilities, and 
11. Areas or locations in which student conduct proceedings are held. 

Members of the Ole Miss Women’s Rifle Team may possess and use weapons sanctioned for their sport 
at the Ole Miss Rifle Center as may competing teams. 

No person may possess a gun, shotgun, rifle, pistol or other firearm on campus while engaged in any type 
of criminal activity, or while consuming or under the influence of alcohol or drugs, regardless of whether 
the individual possesses an Enhanced Carry Permit. An individual with an Enhanced Carry Permit may not 
brandish, exhibit or display a firearm in a threatening manner. The discharge of any firearm on campus is 
strictly prohibited. 

To ensure the safety of all persons on its campus, to protect University property and to ensure no 
disruption of its educational mission, the University also prohibits the wearing of masks, disguises and 
other means of concealing one’s identity. The wearing of protective gear, such as body armor, shields and 
chainmail is also prohibited. 

Violation of this policy may subject one to criminal liability, immediate removal from campus, campus 
events or facilities, or other disciplinary action, including termination or sanctions under the University 
conduct system.  


