
The University of Mississippi  

 

Violence-Free Workplace Policy 

  
Summary/Purpose:  The University of Mississippi’s goal is to ensure the safety of all 
university campuses, facilities, activities, and events so that students, employees (faculty and 

staff), and visitors can work, learn, and enjoy an environment free from violence and threats.  

The purpose of this policy is to encourage all employees to report incidents of threats, 

aggression, and other prohibited behaviors and acts of any individual(s) on university properties 

to their immediate supervisor, University Police Department, and/or Human Resources. This 

policy lists prohibited conduct and outlines reporting responsibilities and procedures should a 

safety concern arise.  
 

Prohibited Conduct 

University of Mississippi prohibits violence, threats of violence, and any other behavior that 

risks or harms the safety of any university campus, facility, activity, or event, or that raises a 

reasonable concern for the safety of students, employees, or visitors at a university campus or 

related facility or during university-sponsored activities or events.  

 

“Violence” is defined as any intentional or reckless act that physically harms people or property.  

“Threat of violence” refers to any verbal or physical conduct that conveys the intent to cause 

physical harm or to place someone in fear of physical harm. 

 

Prohibited conduct includes, but is not limited to: 

 Any ongoing or regularly reoccurring aggressive behavior that would make it difficult for 
a reasonable person in that workplace to perform his or her duties. 

 Engaging in any act of violence toward a person or property 

 Making a direct, indirect, or conditional threat of harm 

 Engaging in any conduct, including aggression, intimidation, harassment, belligerence, 
and disruptive or erratic behavior, that has the purpose or effect of generating a 

reasonable concern for physical safety.  Such conduct may consist of: physical acts, oral 

or written statements, harassing electronic media (i.e. emails text, Facebook, twitter, 

snapchat, etc.), telephone calls, gestures, or behaviors. 

 Damaging or destroying university property or equipment, or threatening such harm 

 Engaging in stalking or aggressive pursuit 

 Participating in, or encouraging, a fight 

 Using any instrument to injure, threaten, or intimidate 

 Brandishing or using any firearm, explosive, or weapon of any kind or possessing a 
firearm in violation of University policy or state law. 

 Using university resources to engage in threats or violence towards anyone 
 

In the interest of protecting safety, the university reserves the right to address any behavior in 

addition to that described above whenever the conduct generates a reasonable concern for the 

safety or wellbeing of students, employees, or visitors at a university campus or related facility 

or during university-sponsored activities or events.  



 

Violation of this policy is considered to be serious misconduct and can lead to disciplinary 

and/or other appropriate responsive action, up to and including termination.  In addition, where 

appropriate, the university may pursue civil and/or criminal prosecution.  

 

When this Policy Applies 

This policy applies to employees, vendors, contractors, consultants, clients, and all persons, 

whether affiliated with the University of Mississippi or not, who visit a campus or facility or 

conduct business with the university. 

 

This policy applies to behavior occurring at any university campus or facility. In addition, this 

policy can apply to conduct occurring off-campus and off-duty, if that conduct generates a 

reasonable concern for safety at a university campus or related facility or during university-

sponsored activities or events, or for the safety of students, employees, or visitors. 

 

“Workplace” is defined as the work setting in general, including any university education 

program or activity, which means all academic, research, educational, public service and 

outreach, extracurricular, athletic, and other programs.  

 

Reporting Responsibilities 

All employees are encouraged to remain alert to, and must immediately report any behaviors 

listed in the “Prohibited Conduct” section above to the persons listed in the “Where to Report” 

section below.  No student or employee should assume that an official knows about a particular 

situation.  

 

In addition, all employees must report any conduct that indicates an employee might 

intentionally commit self-inflicted harm. 

 

Required reporting includes but is not limited to behavior described above that any employees 

experience, witness, or otherwise become aware of, regardless of: (a) whom that behavior 

affects, (b) the perpetrator’s relationship to the university or its students or employees, and (c) 

whether the behavior occurs on or off campus, if there is reason to believe that the behavior 

could affect safety of students, employees, or affiliates. 

 

Employees are encouraged to report any behaviors of concern, whether or not strictly covered by 

this policy, so that the university may evaluate the need to address conduct potentially affecting 

the wellbeing of students, employees, or visitors. 

 

Nothing in this policy is intended to require that any employee breach legally protected privilege 

or confidences, unless otherwise permitted by law. 

 

The University of Mississippi reserves the right to investigate and resolve a complaint or report 

of workplace violence regardless of whether the complainant ultimately desires officials to 

pursue the complaint.  

 

 



Where to Report 

When appropriate, complaints under this policy may be reported to the University Police and 

Campus Safety Department, Human Resources, or the Office of Equal Opportunity and 

Regulatory Compliance. All reports or complaints under this policy will be investigated and 

include confidentiality where appropriate. Once an investigation is complete, a recommendation 

on how to handle the complaint will be submitted to the appropriate area for disposition. The 

University may assist in pursuing civil penalties, criminal penalties, or other appropriate action 

against the offender. 

 

Report concerns involving an employee (faculty or staff member) to:  

Department of Human Resources 

Phone: 662-915-7431 

Email: hr@olemiss.edu 

 

Equal Opportunity and Regulatory Compliance 

Phone: 662-915-7735 

Email: eeo@olemiss.edu 

 

Report concerns involving a contractor or visitor to: 

University Police Department 

Phone: 662-915-7234 

Email: upd@olemiss.edu 

 

You may also submit a report at umatter.olemiss.edu. 

 

Behavioral Intervention Team: 

The Behavioral Intervention Team (BIT) exists to address employee behavior that is of concern, 

such as the behaviors included in, but not limited to, the list of behaviors are threats, aberrant or 

strange behavior, violent or perceived violent behavior, repeated threats of suicide or violence 

against others.  BIT does not pre-empt any other university department in performing its duties in 

enforcing the law or managing student situations. 

 

Additional information may be found at http://umatter.olemiss.edu/bit/. 

 

Non-Retaliation Policy 

The University of Mississippi adheres to a strict policy of non-retaliation and prohibits retaliation 

and threats or attempts to retaliate against anyone who makes a good-faith report under this 

policy or who participates in, cooperates with, or contributes to efforts to investigate and resolve 

such reports. Any employee who believes that he or she is being penalized as a consequence of 

making a report under this policy, or for participating in, cooperating with, or contributing to 

efforts to investigate or resolve a report, should immediately contact the Office of Equal 

Opportunity & Regulatory Compliance at (662) 915-7735. 

 

 

mailto:hr@olemiss.edu
mailto:eeo@olemiss.edu
mailto:upd@olemiss.edu
file:///C:/Users/Andrea%20Jekabsons/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/INetCache/Content.Outlook/O8EEKRW1/umatter.olemiss.edu
http://umatter.olemiss.edu/bit/


Support for those affected by violence 

The University Counseling Center will respond to requests for assistance from victims of 

violence or threats of violence by providing counseling, advocacy, safety planning, and other 

support as appropriate.  If there is an emergency or if you are in immediate danger, call 4911.  

 

Non-Emergency requests for assistance may be directed to: 

 

University Counseling Center 

Address: 320 Lester Hall 

Phone: 662-915-3784 

Email: counslg@olemiss.edu 

Web: counseling.olemiss.edu 

 

University Police Department 

Address: Kinard Hall, Wing C 

Phone: 662-915-9411 

Web: upd.olemiss.edu 

 

Sexual Assault Response 

Address: 270D Martindale 

Phone: 662-915-7045 

Email: TitleIX@olemiss.edu 

Web: umsafe.olemiss.edu 

 

Violence Prevention Office 

Address: 320 Lester Hall 

Phone: 662-915-1059 

Email: vpo@olemiss.edu 

Web: violenceprevention.olemiss.edu 

mailto:counslg@olemiss.edu
file:///C:/Users/Andrea%20Jekabsons/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/INetCache/Content.Outlook/O8EEKRW1/counseling.olemiss.edu
file:///C:/Users/Andrea%20Jekabsons/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/INetCache/Content.Outlook/O8EEKRW1/upd.olemiss.edu
mailto:TitleIX@olemiss.edu
file:///C:/Users/Andrea%20Jekabsons/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/INetCache/Content.Outlook/O8EEKRW1/umsafe.olemiss.edu
mailto:vpo@olemiss.edu
file:///C:/Users/Andrea%20Jekabsons/AppData/Local/Microsoft/Windows/INetCache/Content.Outlook/O8EEKRW1/violenceprevention.olemiss.edu

