
The University of Mississippi 

Unmanned Aircraft Systems (Drones) 

 

Summary/Purpose: This policy establishes general guidelines for the operation of unmanned 

aircraft systems (UAS) on the Oxford campus to ensure compliance with Federal Aviation 

Administration (FAA) regulations (specifically the FAA’s Small Unmanned Aircraft Regulations 

Part 107) and for the purpose of safety and security. In addition, the policy also defines the 

limitation and use and the enforcement of other related university policies and procedures. 

General 

Under this policy, UAS are considered to be powered, remote-controlled, unmanned aircraft 

weighing more than 0.55 pounds, which include drones, quad copters, and motorized model 

aircraft. UAS must be conducted in accordance with any FAA regulations applicable to the 

operation as well as the following University guidelines. 

Any individual operating a UAS over University property must comply with the following: 

 UAS use will be restricted to educational/research and business purposes only and subject 

to University guidelines and FAA regulations. The use of UAS for hobby or recreational 

use on the Oxford campus is not permitted. 

 For purposes of this policy, student researcher operators (SROs) are required to comply 

with the FAA’s educational/recreational rules, while faculty researchers and staff (as well 

as commercially owned operators) are bound by the work/business rules set forth by the 

FAA in Part 107. 

 Application must be made to the Emergency Management Services Department of the 

University for permission to fly the UAS over University property. This must be done at 

least 48 hours in advance of the proposed date/time of the flight. The written request and 

all required information must be submitted at time of application. Incomplete applications 

will not be processed. This permission may be withdrawn at any time for failure to abide 

by this policy or by any law governing the use of UAS. Applications are available on the 

University Emergency Management website or at the University Police Department. 

 UAS pilots who have been initially approved to fly as faculty researchers and staff once, 

will be eligible for expedited approval for future flights providing no other security 

restrictions/concerns are in effect at the time of requested flight. Same day approval can 

be requested via the link provided on the University Emergency Management website. 

Commercially owned (contract) operators are not eligible for expedited approval. 

 Written permission to access restricted airspace must also be obtained from the 

University-Oxford Airport for flight clearance on the date/time of anticipated flight. This 

must be included as part of the application process stated above. 

 

Page 1 of 5 



 A commercially owned (contract) operator shall also provide proof of commercial 

general liability insurance coverage with a minimum limit per occurrence of $1,000,000 

and a minimum general aggregate or $2,000,000. 

 A commercially owned (contract) operator must be accompanied by a representative of 

the University at all times during flight operations. 

 All operation and use of UAS on or above University property must comply with FAA 

regulations and local, state, and federal laws regarding use of UAS. Any operation or 

use of UAS that violates such regulations or laws is prohibited. It is the responsibility of 

the operator of the UAS to ensure that all relevant laws and regulations are adhered to 

during operation of the UAS. 

 The UAS must be registered with the FAA, the registration number must be clearly 

visible on the aircraft, and must match the registration number given on the request for 

permission to fly application. 

 Unsafe operation of any UAS will result in revocation of flight privileges - safety should 

be the top priority with every flight. 

Current FAA Rules for Operating UAS/U of M Classifications 

 Student Researcher Operator Faculty Researchers/Business 

Pilot Requirements Be 13 years old 

 

 

Must have Remote Pilot Airman 

Certificate 

Be 16 years old 

Must pass TSA vetting 

Aircraft Requirements Must be registered if > .55 lbs. Aircraft < 55 pounds 

Must be registered 

Operating Rules Must yield right of way to 

manned aircraft 

Must keep aircraft in sight 

UAS must be < 55 lbs. 

Must follow community-based 

safety guidelines 

Must notify airport and air 

traffic control tower before 

flying within 5 miles of an 

airport 

Class G airspace* 

Must keep aircraft in sight* 

Must fly under 400 ft.* 

Must fly during the day* 

Must fly at or below 100 mph* 

Must yield right of way to 

manned aircraft* 

Must not fly over people* 

Must not fly from moving 

vehicle* 

FAA Regulations effective August 31, 2016 

*All of these rules subject to waiver with proper FAA application in advance of flight. 

Process can take more than 90 days and is completed online at 

https://www.faa.gov/uas/request_waiver/. 

 

 

Page 2 of 5 

https://www.faa.gov/uas/request_waiver/


Prohibited Uses 

Individuals operating UAS over University property may NOT: 

 UAS, including small UAS and model aircrafts, shall not interfere with any educational 

activity on campus. 

 UAS, including small UAS and model aircrafts, shall not be flown over any crowd, 

including, but not limited to, The Grove on game days, or any outdoor concerts, 

commencement, or any other activities of mass assembly. 

 UAS, including small UAS and model aircrafts, shall not be used to monitor or 

record an area where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy in accordance with 

accepted social norms. These areas include, but are not limited to, restrooms, locker 

rooms, individual residential rooms, changing or dressing rooms, and health 

treatment rooms. 

 UAS, including small UAS and model aircrafts, shall not be used to monitor or 

record residential halls, medical facilities, or the outsides or insides of campus 

daycare facilities or where minors may be present (e.g. camps). 

 UAS, including small UAS and model aircrafts, shall not be used to monitor or 

record sensitive institutional or personal information that may be found in 

offices, computers, or laboratories. 

 

Athletic Provisions 

 In order to promote safety, privacy, and fair competition, all operators of UAS, 

including small UAS and model aircrafts, are prohibited from flying on or above 

any Ole Miss intercollegiate athletic facility, unless otherwise authorized by the 

Athletic Department. UAS, including small UAS and model aircrafts, are also 

prohibited from monitoring or recording any Ole Miss intercollegiate athletic 

facility, unless otherwise authorized by the Athletic Department. Ole Miss 

intercollegiate athletic facilities include Vaught-Hemingway Stadium, The Pavilion, 

Tad Coliseum, Ole Miss Track and Field Complex, Manning Center, Tuohy Basketball 

Center, Swayze Field, Ole Miss Softball Complex, Ole Miss Soccer Stadium, Palmer/Salloum Tennis 

Center, Gillom Sports Center, University Golf Course, Patricia C. Lamar National Guard Readiness 

Center, Starnes Athletic Training Center, and athletic indoor and outdoor practice fields and 

training facilities. 

 Pursuant to an FAA "notice to airmen" (NOTAM), UAS are prohibited within a 3 

nautical mile radius (NMR) up to and including 3000 feet above ground level (AGL) 

of Vaught-Hemingway Stadium beginning an hour before the scheduled kick-off 

time of a football game until one hour after the end of the football game. 

 

 

Page 3 of 5 



o Flights conducted for operational purposes or venue or broadcast coverage of a 

football game at Vaught-Hemingway Stadium are permitted if the flights are 

conducted in accordance with federal, state, and local laws, as well as FAA  

regulations and University policies - including those set forth within this policy. 

o The restrictions described above do not apply to those aircraft authorized by 

and in contact with air traffic control for operational or safety of flight 

purposes, Department of Defense, law enforcement, and air ambulance flight 

operations, Fire and Rescue, and EMA. 

 

Enforcement and Penalties 

 

o Persons who are on campus and/or operating a UAS on or above campus and 

are in violation of University policy are trespassers and may be dealt with 

accordingly, including, but not limited to, being removed from campus and 

receiving a written directive to remain off campus. Contractors and vendors 

are expected to comply with this policy and contract terms. 

o Student violations may be addressed in accordance with the Code of Student 

Conduct/M Book as well as other applicable policies and may include sanctions, 

up to and including expulsion. 

o Employee violations may be resolved in accordance with University policies, 

up to and including termination. 

o Violators of local, state, and federal laws and regulations may be dealt 

with by appropriate law enforcement and other agencies. 

 

Definitions: 

Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) - UAS are also known as or may be characterized as 

Drones. According to the FAA, a UAS is the unmanned aircraft and all of the associated support 

equipment, control station, data links, telemetry, communications and navigation equipment, 

etc., necessary to operate the unmanned aircraft. UAS may have a variety of names including 

quadcopter, quadrotor, etc. FAA regulation applies to UAS regardless of size or weight. Model 

aircraft are not considered by the FAA as UAS and have different regulations. 

 

Model Aircraft - Model aircraft are considered differently by the FAA than other UAS and have 

different regulations. Model aircraft are not for business purposes, only for hobby and recreation. 

(Use of UAS related to the University of Mississippi does not qualify as model aircraft 

regulations.) Model aircraft must be kept within visual sightline of the operator, and should 

weigh under 55 pounds unless certified by an aeromodeling community-based organization. 

Model aircraft must be flown a sufficient distance from populated areas. 

 

 

 

Page 4 of 5 



 

Student Researcher Operators: Students currently enrolled in a specific related 

course and under the supervision of faculty who will be operating UAS as part of their 

course requirements. This includes Student Media Center students affiliated with The 

Daily Mississippian and NewsWatch under the direct supervision of University 

faculty/staff. 

 

Small Unmanned Aircraft Regulations (Part 107): The FAA’s rules for non-

hobbyist small unmanned aircraft (UAS) operations that cover a broad spectrum of 

commercial uses for drones weighing less than 55 pounds. Summary of the new rule 

can be found at https://www.faa.gov/uas/media/Part_107_Summary.pdf. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 5 of 5 

https://www.faa.gov/uas/media/Part_107_Summary.pdf

