
  

The University of Mississippi 
Office of Financial Aid 

University, MS  38677 
Phone: (800) 891- 4596 Fax: (662) 915-1164 

 

 

 

Policy Name:  Study Abroad 

 

 

Purpose:  This document contains the Office of Financial Aid’s current policies and  

   procedures for students that participate through the University’s Study  

   Abroad Programs. 

 

 

Disclaimer:  This policy is subject to change, without notice, in order to comply with  

   administrative and regulatory requirements.   

 

Policy Contents: Study Abroad Overview 

   Study Abroad Process 

   Enrollment and Grade Monitoring 

 

 

Definitions and Terms: 

 

 FAFSA – Free Application for Federal Student Aid 

 FSA – Federal Student Aid 

 OFA – Office of Financial Aid 

 SAO – Study Abroad Office 

 UM – University of Mississippi 

 

 

 Study Abroad  Overview 

     

 

The University of Mississippi offers opportunities for its students to participate in study abroad 

programs all over the world.  The OFA works closely with the SAO to ensure that UM students 

receive the financial aid that they qualify for while attending a UM study abroad program. These 

programs are administered directly by UM and earn UM credits.  

 

Students enrolled in a study abroad program approved for credit by UM may be considered 

enrolled at UM for the purpose of applying for assistance under the FSA programs. 

 

 



 

 

Part 11.1 Study Abroad Process   

 

Students enrolling in a UM study abroad program must apply with the SAO and meet with the 

OFA.   

 

OFA will advise students of the financial aid process and the availability of Federal, State, and 

institutional aid.   

 

SAO provides OFA with a list of participants and the following information regarding their 

programs: term, location, name of the program, cost of attendance, start date and end date for 

each term.   

 

OFA will update the student’s cost of attendance for the term abroad and will determine when 

the student’s aid can be disbursed.  The OFA will only disburse a student’s aid 5 days before the 

actual start date of the study abroad program.  The students are advised of this before leaving for 

their program.   

 

The OFA will discuss budgeting issues for the student and encourage the student to meet with 

the SAO to know exactly what their charges will be while studying abroad.   

 

The OFA also advises students to make sure they have been properly registered for their courses 

while abroad.  

 

The OFA will hold a student’s aid from disbursing until the OFA receives confirmation that the 

student is actually enrolled in the approved courses at the institution abroad. 

 

 Enrollment and Grade Monitoring 

 

 

SAO will provide OFA updates when students are added or withdrawn from their program 

before the program begins. 

 

The SAO updates the OFA when a student withdraws from a program after the program has 

started.  The OFA will process a Return of Title IV calculation to determine if any Federal Aid 

must be returned. OFA will review any institutional and state aid to determine if paybacks are 

needed.  

 

The OFA will verify all participants received grades and completed their coursework while 

abroad at the end of each term.  The SAO will submit incomplete grades to all students that 

studied abroad until the final transcripts are received.  If the final transcript from the institution 

abroad is not received in a timely manner, those incomplete grades will be turned into F grades 

which can affect future aid and eligibility. If a student did not complete their coursework, then 

the OFA will process a Return of Title IV calculation to determine if any Federal Aid must be 

returned and determine if any institutional or State aid must be repaid based on their policies.  



 

The OFA will place holds on students’ accounts preventing future aid from disbursing until the 

SAO receives the final transcript from the institution abroad. 


