
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 2 
 

 

Dual Career Accommodation Statement of Practice 
 
Purpose:  The purpose of considering dual career accommodation is to enhance the University’s 
ability to recruit and retain outstanding faculty.  This statement creates a framework for exploring 
employment opportunities across various units on campus for spouses or partners of prospective 
or current faculty.  The University of Mississippi recognizes that finding meaningful employment 
for a spouse or partner is important to the successful recruitment and retention of faculty.  
 
Process:  A prospective (i.e., a successful candidate) or current faculty member may ask the 
University to assist with the on-campus employment search for a spouse/partner; and we are 
committed to making an effort to assist with the on-campus employment search for spouses and 
partners.  We strongly encourage spouses/partners to apply for open positions at the University 
(see jobs.olemiss.edu).  Outside the formal application process for open positions posted on the 
University of Mississippi website, spouse/partner hires may be accommodated in one-year (with 
the option to renew for one more year) temporary appointments in areas where a successful 
“match” can be made and funds are available.  The goal of the temporary position is to allow the 
spouse/partner time to identify and seek permanent opportunities both on and off campus.  During 
the temporary appointment, the spouse/partner is eligible to apply and compete for any open 
permanent positions of interest, including tenure/tenure-track positions.  Departments are 
encouraged to prioritize tenure/tenure-track national, competitive searches or utilize accelerated 
search processes to assist with dual career accommodation hires when appropriate. 
 
The process for making a request to explore temporary employment opportunities for a 
spouse/partner is as follows. 

1. The candidate for employment or current faculty member should convey the need 
for assistance in exploring employment opportunities for a spouse/partner to the 
department chair or director and provide the spouse/partner’s resume/curriculum 
vitae and other information about the spouse/partner’s experiences and interests.   

2. The department chair/director will communicate this need to the respective Dean 
who will contact the Office of the Provost.   

3. The Dean and Office of the Provost will identify relevant departments/units based 
on the experience and qualifications of the spouse/partner and determine whether 
funding for a temporary position is available.   

4. If funding is available, the Office of the Provost will forward the resume/curriculum 
vitae to the deans, directors, or vice chancellors of the respective units identified.  
The spouse/partner will be evaluated by the relevant department(s) in a rapid 
manner to make a determination as to whether the spouse/partner’s experience 
and qualifications are sufficient to be employed within a temporary position within 
that department/unit.  If not, that information is communicated to the Dean 
requesting assistance.  

5. If a department/unit is interested in the spouse/partner, the Office of the Provost 
will work with the involved units to set-up an interview quickly for the 
spouse/partner so that a hiring decision can be made by the respective unit.   

6. If a decision to offer a temporary position to the spouse/partner is made, all Human 
Resource processes should be followed, including the background check.  

 
 
 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 2 
 

Key Principles: 
 
The University of Mississippi provides equal opportunity in any employment practice, education 
program, or education activity to all qualified persons. The University complies with all applicable 
laws regarding equal opportunity and affirmative action and does not unlawfully discriminate 
against any employee or applicant for employment based upon race, color, gender, sex, sexual 
orientation, gender identity or expression, religion, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, or 
genetic information. 
 
The University of Mississippi requires competitive searches for permanent positions, including 
tenure and tenure-track positions. Positions that include tenure or the opportunity to be evaluated 
for tenure are not temporary and are outside the scope of this process.  If a spouse or partner is 
interested in earning a tenure-track position, he/she must apply for an open tenure/tenure-track 
position and emerge as the successful candidate. 
 
While the University of Mississippi recognizes the value of promoting opportunities for dual career 
spouses/partners and has established this statement of practice, this statement does not create any 
entitlement or contractual rights to employment assistance or employment or any other obligation 
with respect to any spouse or partner. 
 
The University of Mississippi relies upon the judgments of those in the hiring departments to assess 
the qualifications and competence of those seeking employment in those departments. 
 
The ability to hire spouses into temporary positions is subject to the availability of funds. Funds for 
these temporary positions are finite and generated, as available, in a shared capacity between the 
Office of the Provost, schools/colleges, departments, and other UM resources.  
 
The hiring of a spouse/partner should be consistent with the University of Mississippi policies. 
 
This process and the opportunities outlined in this statement of practice may be utilized for critical 
staff hires with approval by appropriate division leader.  
 
Disclaimer 
An individual’s success in securing employment is ultimately based on his/her credentials, individual 
efforts, employment-related goals, the University’s institutional needs, and the job market.  This 
Statement of Practice does not guarantee employment, the creation of a job vacancy, or exert any 
influence over the competitive search and selection process. 


