
The University of Mississippi 

 

Fraternal Student Organizations Associated with Fraternal 

Leadership & Learning 

DSA.DS.400.005 
 

Page 1 of 2 

Summary/Purpose:  The purpose of this policy is to define student organizations that are 

officially associated with the Office of Fraternal Leadership & Learning. This policy outlines 

basic expectations of those organizations and the individuals interested in affiliating with those 

organizations. 

 

 

Organizations associated with Fraternal Leadership & Learning include any organization that 

belongs to the National Pan-Hellenic Council, National Panhellenic Conference, North-

American Interfraternity Conference and any other fraternal organization governed by the local 

National Pan-Hellenic Council, College Panhellenic Council and Interfraternity Council. 

 

ROSTERS: All fraternal organizations are required to provide accurate rosters to Fraternal 

Leadership & Learning by the deadline(s) determined by Fraternal Leadership & Learning. 

These deadlines are communicated prior to each academic semester to the reported chapter 

president.  

 

Accurate rosters ensure that all members are represented for a multitude of purposes, such as 

parking eligibility, meal plan eligibility, grade reports, conduct reports, emergency management, 

etc. Failure to adhere to the deadline or submitting a roster in an incorrect format will result in an 

automatic loss of social privileges for a defined time period and a 0.00 chapter grade on the 

Community Academic Report.  

 

SUMMER RECRUITMENT: Recruiting Potential New Members (PNMs) or entertaining 

students who may be interested in joining a fraternal organization at the University of 

Mississippi is only permissible during the summer recess under the following conditions:   

 No alcohol or other drugs are served to, gifted to, or consumed by either PNMs or active 
members at any point 

 All applicable Federal, State, local, University of Mississippi, Governing Council, and 
National Organization policies are followed (i.e. Event Registration, overnight hosting, 

legal consumption, etc.) 

 Events and interest meetings organized and/or hosted by alumni or graduate chapters 
must be registered with the Ole Miss Student Union regardless of meeting location  

 

NEW MEMBER ELIGIBILITY: Only those students who are enrolled in at least 12 credit 

hours at the University of Mississippi are eligible for membership with a fraternity or sorority 

associated with Fraternal Leadership & Learning.  

 

To participate in Panhellenic or IFC Formal Recruitment or NPHC Intake processes, students 

must complete any and all educational programming as determined by Fraternal Leadership & 

Learning. Potential New Members (PNM) are informed of such educational programming prior 

to the fall academic semester. 

 



The University of Mississippi 

 

Fraternal Student Organizations Associated with Fraternal 

Leadership & Learning 

DSA.DS.400.005 
 

Page 2 of 2 

GOOD STANDING: From time to time various University Departments and National Offices 

associated with undergraduate chapters represented at the University of Mississippi will inquire 

about a chapter’s status with Fraternal Leadership & Learning.  Within many fraternal 

organizations the term “in good standing” is a measurement of compliance.  

 

Fraternal organizations at the University of Mississippi will only be in good standing with 

Fraternal Leadership & Learning if the following conditions are met: 

 Chapters must be recognized by an inter/national fraternal organization 

 Chapters actively participate in at least 80% of all Fraternal Leadership & Learning 
required events and initiatives (Greek Council, Annual Greek Summit, other special 

community-based programs, etc.) 

 Chapters provide all required data and information for the purposes of institutional 
reporting (rosters, new member lists, financial information, assessment data, facility-

related data, officer contact information, etc.) 

 Chapters submit applications for Core Value Greek Awards  

 Chapters maintain the academic standards set by the respective Governing Councils 

 Chapters remain current in payments to both the University and respective Governing 
Council 

 

Fraternal organizations may retain “good standing” status with Fraternal Leadership & Learning 

once the above criteria are met.  

 

Chapters that have any pending conduct charges or chapters that have been charged with a 

conduct violation are not in “good standing” until any and all sanctions are complete.  

 

If these criteria are not met, chapters risk the loss of ability to host events, ability to receive 

information and endorsement from Fraternal Leadership & Learning, ability to reserve space on 

campus, and/ or other sanctions that ultimately include permanent removal from campus.  

 

 

 


