
The University of Mississippi

Facilities Use Policy 

Summary/Purpose:  This Policy governs the use of facilities and grounds of the University of 
Mississippi (the University) and implements relevant policies of the University’s governing 
board, The Mississippi Board of Trustees for State Institutions of Higher Learning (“IHL”). 

I. GENERAL POLICY. 

IHL Policy 1105.01 states that “[a]ll real property on the campus of any institution of higher 
learning” including “all campus grounds, buildings, facilities, stadiums or other improvements” 
is dedicated for “the specific purpose of furthering the educational, research, and/or service 
missions of the institution. Accordingly, access to institutional property is limited to those 
persons with the specific and exclusive purpose of furthering the institutions’ missions.” The 
same IHL policy also requires all persons on University property to abide by all applicable laws 
and regulations as well as IHL and University policies. IHL Policy 1105.01 authorizes the 
University to “deny or condition entrance onto or into [University] Property or remove from the 
same, any person whose presence interferes with or does not advance the [University’s] 
mission[] or any person who violates or refuses to comply” with applicable law or policy.   

IHL Board Policy 912 states: “In general, it shall be the policy of the institutions not to make 
available the real property, facilities and other facilities of the institutions to outside 
organizations. Exceptions to this policy may be approved by the Institutional Executive Officer.”  
Accordingly, the University does not ordinarily make University Facilities available to 
individuals or organizations that are not a part of or otherwise affiliated with the University. 

This policy seeks to implement the IHL policies referenced above. 

II. DEFINITIONS. 

A.  “Event and Meeting Venue” means a University Facility that has been approved 
for use by External Users by complying with the requirements of this policy, 
including the adoption of a facility use agreement and facility use policy approved 
through the process defined by this policy. 

B. “External User” means any individual, organization, entity or group that is not a 
University User or Student Organization User. 

Page !  of !1 4



The University of Mississippi

C. “Student Organization User” means an active student organization recognized by 
the University through the process managed by the Office of the Dean of 
Students. 

D. “University Facility” means any building, improvement, stadium, venue, or 
facility; any room, office, laboratory or common area within any building, 
improvement, stadium, venue or facility; and any outdoor facility, courtyard, 
plaza, athletics or other field, garden, land, or property owned, leased, or under 
the control of the University. 

E. “University User” means any University department, unit, standing committee, 
employee (when acting as an employee of the University) or affiliated entity. In 
the context of University facilities which are dedicated to student use (e.g., 
student housing, study rooms, student recreation facilities, etc…), students are 
also considered a University User.  

III. UNIVERSITY MAY LIMIT ACCESS TO UNIVERSITY FACILITIES, 
INCLUDING UNIVERSITY COMMON AREAS. 

Most University facilities are dedicated to the exclusive and particular use of a University 
department or unit for a particular University purpose, as assigned from time-to-time by the 
University. On most occasions, the University does not restrict public access to common areas of 
the University, such as streets and drives and outdoor recreational and other spaces. 
Nevertheless, the University reserves the right to restrict or limit access to the University’s 
campus and to any University Facility, including common areas. The University also reserves the 
right to deny or condition entrance into or onto any University Facility (including common areas) 
and reserves the right to remove any person whose presence interferes with or does not advance 
the University’s mission or any person who violates or refuses to comply with any applicable 
law, regulation, rule or policy.  

To ensure personal safety, to protect University property, and to ensure order, the University 
reserves the right to prohibit the wearing of masks, personal disguises and other means of 
concealing one’s identity and to prohibit the possession of weapons, props, torches, open flames, 
items that may be used as weapons, and protective gear on the University campus and/or at 
University events. 

Page !  of !2 4



The University of Mississippi

IV. DESIGNATION OF UNIVERSITY FACILITY AS EVENT OR MEETING VENUE 
AVAILABLE FOR EXTERNAL OR STUDENT ORGANIZATION USE. 

If a University department or unit exercising control over a particular University Facility wishes 
to designate a University Facility as an Event or Meeting Venue for reservation and use by 
External Users, the University department must submit a facility use agreement, facility 
reservation form (if any), and a facility use policy for the proposed Event or Meeting Venue for 
approval by the Vice Chancellor for Administration and Finance and for approval by the General 
Counsel of the University. Any request for approval should include the following information:  

A. A floorplan for the proposed Event and Meeting Venue that includes dimensions, 
ingress and egress, and the venue’s capacity under any applicable fire or safety 
codes; 

B. Any limitations on types of uses proposed for the Event and Meeting Venue (e.g., 
athletics competitions, recitals, meetings, receptions, concerts, weddings, etc.…); 

C. Proposed usage fees along with information about fees charged by similar venues 
in the local area; 

D. Any proposed insurance requirements for External Users or Student Organization 
Users; 

E. Any proposed security requirements and how those requirements are determined; 

F. Any proposed fees for related services, including but not limited to fees for 
security, cleaning, sound/AV support, etc….; 

G. Any proposed requirements related to or limitations on food or beverage service; 

H. How University Users, External Users, and Student Organization Users may 
reserve the Event and Meeting Venue and how priority for competing uses would 
be determined or resolved; 

I. Any proposed limitations on modifications to the facility or policies regarding 
decorations. 

J. Any distinctions or differences in any facility use policy or agreement based upon 
whether the user is an External Users, University User or Student Organization 
User. 

Page !  of !3 4



The University of Mississippi

If the facility use agreement, the facility reservation form (if any), and the facility use policy for 
the proposed Event and Meeting Venue have been approved by the Vice Chancellor for 
Administration and Finance and by the University General Counsel, then by operation of this 
policy, the Chancellor has approved use by External Users consistent with the terms of the 
approved facility use agreement and the approved facility use policy.   

If a University Facility has not been approved as an Event and Meeting Venue under this policy, 
then External Users may not reserve or use a University Facility without the expressed, written 
approval of the Chancellor for each such use. 

V. APPLICATION OF OTHER POLICIES, RULES AND LAWS. 

The use and enjoyment of any University Facility, including common areas generally accessible 
by visitors and the public and any Event and Meeting Venue, are subject to all rules, regulations, 
policies of the University and the IHL and all federal, state and local laws and regulations. 

Page !  of !4 4


