
The University of Mississippi 

Student Organizations Structured with  

Probationary Membership Statuses 

DSA.DS.400.006 
 

Page 1 of 1 

 

Summary/Purpose:  The purpose of this policy is to outline expectations for student 

organizations that utilize a probationary membership status. This policy defines when new 

member education may take place and requires adherence to affiliated national organizations’ 

policies and expectations. This policy also outlines initiation/induction requirements for such 

student organizations.   

 

Student organizations that utilize a probationary membership process are inherently designed to 

introduce new members to the organization in a structured way. Probationary membership is 

defined as a process where new members are guided through an orientation and/or educational 

training before receiving full benefits of membership.  

 

NEW MEMBER EDUCATION: New member education may take place only during the fall 

and spring academic semesters when classes are in session. No activities shall take place before 

the first day of the fall and spring academic semesters, after the final day of classes during the 

fall and spring semesters, or during any University holiday break (i.e. Fall or Spring Break). 

 

Students must also comply with expectations, deadlines, and programs determined by national 

organizations affiliated with the local organizations. This policy intends to ensure alignment 

between the practices of local organizations and the expectations of affiliated national 

organizations.   

 

INITIATION/INDUCTION: All new members must be initiated or inducted and receive full 

benefits of membership either (1) by the end of the same semester they are recruited or (2) within 

an eight (8) week window, whichever is the shorter time. 

 

Organizations may seek an exception to this policy to initiate the first week of the following 

academic semester if a formal request is submitted by the inter/national organization’s Executive 

Director (or the equivalent) and is approved by the Ole Miss Student Union. 

 

 


