
The University of Mississippi

Educational Sanction	  Non-­‐Compliance	  and Monitoring Policy

Summary/Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to inform students of their duty to honor
University prescribed educational sanctions and outcomes initiated through and as a result	  of
their involvement	  in the conflict	  resolution and student	  conduct	  process. The overarching goal
is to resolve conflict	  at the lowest	  levels possible through education, facilitation and support	  of
students and to promote the completion of the assigned educational sanctions.

As a University, the purpose of the conflict	  resolution and student	  conduct	  process is to support	  
students as they overcome mistakes and to provide a process to adjudicate possible violations
of University policy when appropriate and necessary. As a result, students who have been
documented for allegedly violating University policy will be provided due process notice and
time to meet	  with a University hearing officer to discuss the circumstances and their
involvement	  (if any). If the student	  accepts responsibility or is found to be responsible for
violating University policy, an educational sanction may be assigned as a method to support	  
learning and to assist	  in repairing harm to self, others, and/or the community as a whole.
Once a sanction is assigned an original sanction deadline date will be provided to the student	  in
writing. Under this policy proposal, failure to complete the prescribed educational sanction by
the original assigned deadline will result	  in the following:

Failure to Complete Sanction, FIRST OFFENSE: Failure to complete the assigned sanction by the
original assigned deadline shall result	  in a monetary fine of $150.00 applied to the student’s
account	  AND a revised sanction completion deadline will be provided to the student	  in writing.

Failure to Complete Sanction, SECOND OFFENSE: Failure to complete the assigned sanction by
the revised 1st	  offense deadline shall result	  in a monetary fine of $300.00 applied to the
student	  account	  AND a revised sanction completion deadline will be provided to the student	  in
writing.

Failure to Complete Sanction, THIRD OFFENSE: Failure to complete the assigned sanction by
the revised 2nd offense deadline shall result	  in the student	  being placed on a deferred
suspension status with a final deadline for sanctions to be completed in full to avoid being
suspended from the University for Disregard of University Authority and Failure to Comply with
the assigned University educational sanctions.

Deferred suspension. “Deferred suspension is a designated period of time during which you are
given the opportunity to demonstrate the ability to abide by community expectations of



behavior articulated in Student	  Conduct	  Rules and Regulations. During a deferred suspension,
you will be officially suspended from the University, but	  the suspension will be deferred,
meaning that	  you may continue to attend classes at this time, however, the suspension will be
automatically enforced for failure to complete any assigned sanctions by the deadline and/or
for any subsequent	  violation of the Student	  Conduct	  Rules and Regulations, unless the Office of
Conflict	  Resolution and Student	  Conduct	  determines otherwise in exceptional circumstances”


