
The University of Mississippi 
 

 
Consensual Relationships Policy 

 
Summary/Purpose: This policy highlights the risks of sexual or romantic relationships in the 
workplace or academic settings. Romantic or sexual relationships between students and 
employees, as well as between supervisors and subordinates, who have authority or influence 
over aid, benefits, services, or the academic progress of that student may create an appearance of 
impropriety that is contrary to the values and interest of The University of Mississippi (UM). 
Certain relationships are prohibited, while other relationships must be disclosed and may also 
require that an individual recuse himself or herself from supervising or evaluating their partner. 
The purpose of this policy is to clarify appropriate student/employee and employee/employee 
relationships. 

 
Policy 

 

This policy applies to all students, employees (faculty or staff), and others (who will be included 
in this policy as staff) who participate in UM programs and activities. 

 
There are special risks in any sexual or romantic relationship between individual s in inherently 
unequal positions, and parties in such a relationship assume those risks. In the university context, 
such positions include (but are not limited to) teacher and student, supervisor and employee, 
senior faculty and jw1ior faculty, mentor and trainee, adviser and advisee, teaching assistant and 
student, principal investigator and postdoctoral scholar or research assistant, coach and athlete, 
attending physician and resident or fellow, and individuals who supervise the day-to-d ay student 
living environment and their students. 

 
Because of the potential for conflict of interest, exploitation, favoritism, and bias, such 
relationships may undermine the real or perceived integrity of the supervision and evaluation 
provided. Further, these relationships can be less consensual than the individual whose position 
confers power or authority believes. In addition, circumstances may change, and conduct that was 
previously welcome may become unwelcome. Even when both parties have consented at the 
outset to a sexual or romantic involvement, this past consent does not remove grounds for a 
charge based upon subsequent unwelcome conduct. 

 
Such relationships may also have unintended, adverse effects on the climate of an academic 
program or work unit, thereby impairing the learning or working environment for others - both 
during such a relationship and after any break-up.  Relationships in which one party is in a 
position to evaluate the work or influence the career of the other may provide grounds for 
complaint by third parties when that relationship gives undue access or advantage, restricts 
opportunities, or simply creates a perception of these problems. 

 
For all of these reasons, sexual or romantic relationships-- even when consensual--between 
individuals in inherently unequal posit ions should in general be avoided and i n many 
circumstances are strictly prohibited by this pol icy. Since these relationships can occur i n 
multiple contexts on campus, this policy addresses certain contexts specifically. However, the 
policy covers all sexual and romantic relationships involving individuals in unequal positions, 



 

even if not addressed explicitly in this policy. Individual departments may adopt more stringent 
policies concerning relationships between faculty/staff and students, including a policy that 
prohibits such relationships. Any department policy must be approved by the Office of General 
Counsel prior to implementation. 

 
 
 

Relationship between an Employee (Faculty/Staff) and a Student 
 

At a university, the roles of employees are multifaceted, including serving as intellectual guides, 
mentors, role models and advisors. This role is at the heart of the university's mission and its 
integrity must be maintained. The employee's influence and authority can extend far beyond the 
classroom and into the future, affecting the academic progress and careers of our students. 

 
Accordingly, the university expects employees to maintain interactions with students free from 
influences that may interfere with the learning and personal development to which students are 
entitled. In this context, employees include those who are entrusted to teach, supervise, mentor 
and coach students, including faculty and consulting faculty of all ranks, lecturers, academic 
advisors, and principal investigators. 

 
As a general proposition, the University of Mississippi believes that a sexual or romantic 
relationship between a student and an employee- even where consensual and whether or not the 
student is subject to supervision or evaluation- is inconsistent with university values. Not only 
can these relationships harm the educational environment for the individual student involved, 
they also undermine the educational environment for other students.  Furthermore, such 
relationships may expose the employee to charges of misconduct and create a potential liability, 
not only for the employee, but also for the university if it is determined that laws against sexual 
harassment or discrimination have been violated. 

 
For the reasons outlined above, whenever an employee has had, or in the future might reasonably 
be expected to have, academic responsibility or authority over a student, such relationships are 
prohibited. This includes, for example, any faculty member who teaches in a student's 
department, program or d division. Conversely, no employee shall exercise academic 
responsibility over a student with whom he or she has previously had a sexual or romantic 
relationship. "Academic responsibility" includes (but is not limited to) teaching, grading, 
mentoring, advising on or evaluating research or other academic activity, participating in 
decisions regarding funding or other resources, clinical supervision, and recommending for 
admissions, employment, fellowships or awards. 
In this context, students include undergraduate, graduate and professional school students, 
postdoctoral scholars, and clinical residents or fellows. 

 
 
 

When a preexisting sexual or romantic relationship between an employee and a student is 
prohibited by this policy - or if a relationship not previously prohibited becomes prohibited due 
to a change in circumstances - the employee must both recuse himself or herself from any 
supervisory or academic responsibility over the student, and notify his or her supervisor, 
department chai r or dean about the situation so that adequate alternative supervisory or 



 

evaluative at arrangements can be put in place. Failure to disclose the relationship in a timely 
fashion will itself be considered a violation of policy. 

 
Relationship between a Student and a Student 

 

Many existing policies govern student responsibilities towards each other.  The current policy 
applies when undergraduate or graduate students or post-doctoral scholars are serving in a 
supervisory or authoritative role. The policy does not prohibit students from having consensual 
sexual or romantic relationships with fellow students. 

 
However, if such a relationship exists between a student and another student in a setting for which 
the student teacher or housing employee is serving in this capacity, s/he shall not exercise any 
evaluative, teaching function or supervision for that student.  Furthermore, the student must recuse 
himself or herself and notify his or her supervisor so that alternative evaluative, oversight or 
teaching arrm1gements can be put in place.  Failure to notify and recuse in this situation will 
be subject to academic and /or employment discipline. 

 
Relationship between an Employee and an Employee 

 

Consensual sexual or romantic relationships between adult employees (including faculty) are not 
in general prohibited by this policy. If an employee has a consensual relationship with at1other 
employee  who is not a subordinate, then he or she shall refrain from participating or influencing 
votes or decisions that may reward or penalize that employee (such as votes or decisions 
regarding tenure and/or promotion).   However, relationships between employees in which one 
has authority over the other are always potentially problematic. This includes not only relationships 
between supervisors and their staff, but also between senior faculty and junior 
faculty, faculty and both academic and non-academic staff, and so forth. 

 
Where such a relationship develops, the person in the position of greater authority or power must 
recuse him/herself to ensure that he/she does not exercise any supervisory or evaluative function 
over the other person in the relationship. W here such recusal is required, the recusing party must 
also notify his/her supervisor so that person can fulfill the responsibilities outlined below. 
The University of Mississippi has the option to take any action necessary to insure compliance 
with the spirit of this policy, including transferring either or both employees to minimize 
disruption of the work unit. 

 
 
 
Supervisor's Responsibilities 

 

Within fifteen (15) working days of receiving a report of a Consensual Relationship, the supervisor 
shall consult with his or her supervisor to develop a plan to manage or eliminate all conflicts of 
interest and mitigate adverse  effects on the  involved parties and other third patties. This plan shall 
document, in writing, the actions that shall be taken, including one or more of the following 
actions: 

 
1.  Transfer supervisory, decision-making, evaluative, academic, and/or advisory 

responsibilities; 
2.   Provide an additional layer of oversight to the supervisory role; 



 

3.   Transfer one of the individuals to another position; and /or 
4.   Take any other action reasonably necessary to manage or eliminate the actual or potential 

conflict of interest and/or mitigate adverse effects; and 
5.  Report the relationship to the Title IX Coordinator. Such notification is always required 

where recusal is required. Failure to disclose the relationship in a timely fashion will 
itself be considered a violation of policy. 

 
Additional Efforts and Matters 

 

Every effort should be made to preserve confidentiality, sharing names and pertinent information 
only with individuals directly involved in these actions and only as necessary. 

 
The University of Mississippi has the option to take any action necessary to insure compliance 
with the spirit of this policy, including transferring either or both employees to minimize 
disruption of the work unit. 

 
As provided  by the Title IX Coordinator, all records of proceedings  and actions  under this policy 
shall be placed in an archive maintained  by the Department  of Human Resources  and shall be 
kept for seven (7) years or the duration of employment  with UM, whichever  is longer. 

 
If there is any doubt whether a relationship falls within this policy, individuals should disclose the 
facts and seek guidance rather than fail to disclose.  Questions may be addressed to the supervisor 
or dean or to the Title IX Coordinator located in the Equal Opportunity & Regulatory Compliance 
Office.  In those rare situations where it is programmatically y infeasible to provide alternative 
supervision or evaluation, the cognizant dean, director or supervisor must approve all evaluative 
and compensation actions. 

 
Employees who engage in sexual or romantic relationships with a student or other employee 
contrary to the prohibitions and requirements provided in this policy are subject to disciplinary 
action up to and including termination, depending on the nature and context of the violation. 
They will also be held accountable for any adverse consequences that result from those 
relationships. Any employee who reasonably believes there may be a violation of this policy 
shall report the violation to the Title IX office by phone at 662-915-7045 or via email to 
Title IX @olemiss.edu. 

 
A potential violation of this policy will lead to an investigation. If, after an investigation, a 
violation is determined to have occurred, disciplinary action will be taken as permitted by 
university policy and law, up to and including termination of employment. 
A person with questions or concerns regarding the adequacy of the measures that are 
implemented to address an actual, potential, or perceived conflict of interest arising from a 
disclosed consensual relationship should bring those concerns to the attention of the relevant 
supervisor(s), the Department of Human Resources, or Office of the Provost or utilize the Office of 
University Ombudsperson. 

 
This policy does not apply to situations of nepotism involving related or married individuals, 
which is governed under our  Employment of Relatives Policy.  Additionally, this pol icy does not 
cover non-consensual situations, which is governed under our  Sexual Harassment  Policy. 

mailto:x@olen1iss.edu


 

 
Non-Retaliation Policy 

 

UM adheres to a strict policy of non-retaliation and prohibits retaliation and threats or attempts 
to retaliate against anyone who makes a good-faith report under this policy or who participates 
in, cooperates with, or contributes to eff01is to investigate and resolve such reports.  Any student, 
faculty, or staff member who believes the he or she is being penalized as a consequence of 
making a report under this policy, or for participating in, cooperating with, or contributing to 
efforts to investigate  or resolve a repot1, should immediately  contact the Office of Equal 
Opportuni ty & Regulatory Compliance  at (662) 915-7735. 

 
Definitions 

 
• The term "consensual relationship" may include amorous or romantic relationships 

created by mutual consent and is intended to indicate conduct that goes beyond what a 
reasonably prudent person would believe to be a collegial or professional relationship. 

• The term "employee" includes any person currently employed by UM, either full-time or 
part-time, in any location and in any capacity. "Employee" includes, but i s not limited to, 
administrators, faculty, staff, and graduate assistants/graduate instructors. 

• The term "student" includes any person applying to the university or currently enrolled, 
either full-time or part-time, in any course or academic program which includes 
undergraduates and those enrolled in graduate, doctoral or professional programs. 

• The term "supervisor" shall mean the person who performs the employee's annual 
performance evaluation or anyone who oversees, directs or evaluates the work of others, 
including, but not limited to, managers, administrators, coaches, directors, physicians, 
deat1s, chairs, advisors, and teaching assistants, as well as faculty members in their roles 
as instructors, as supervisors of their staff, and as participants in decisions affecting the 
careers of other faculty members. 

• The term "teacher" includes any individual who teaches or supervises students regardless 
of whether he or she is tenure-track, non-tenure track, adjunct, full-time, part-time, or a 
graduate instructor. 

• The term "retaliation" includes any adverse treatment (beyond a petty slight or trivial 
annoyance)  that is taken because a person has opposed at1 act or practice, made a 
compliant, testified, assisted or participated  in any manner in an investigation  proceeding 
or hearing concerning  protected  rights. "Retaliation" also means coercing, intimidating, 
threatening, interfering, or discriminating, against any person for the purpose of 
interfering with any protected right or because the other person has exercised a protected 
right or aided or encouraged another person to exercise a protected right. 

• The term "University of Mississippi" or "university" includes all of the University of 
Mississippi campuses and related entities. 


