
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 1 
 

Communication of Accreditation Information 

 

The University of Mississippi is committed to providing valid information to accrediting agencies and 

about its accreditation status to appropriate agencies and constituents.  This applies to both the 

institution’s regional accreditation and to the professional accreditation of academic programs and 

supports policiesi and standardsii of the Mississippi Institutes of Higher Learning (IHL) and Southern 

Association of Colleges Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) related to accreditation.  

The institution maintains transparency regarding the reporting through the following actions. 

1. The institution displays its accreditation status to its students, prospective students, alumni, 

employees, and the public through statements published on its Web page, catalog, and the Student 

Consumer Disclosures Web page.  Language about the regional accreditation status of the institution 

must conform to the requirements by SACSCOC. 

2. The Web sites for off-campus sites display the regional accreditation status, as well as the 

professional accreditation status of academic programs delivered at these sites. Language about the 

regional accreditation status of the institution must conform to the requirements by the Southern 

Association of Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). 

3. Changes in accreditation status (regional or professional), including any adverse communications, are 

provided to the Mississippi IHL office. 

4. Changes in professional accreditation status, including any adverse communications, are provided to 

SACSCOC. Information about current professional accreditation status, including dates of most recent 

reviews, are provided in periodic compliance reports submitted to SACSCOC. 

5. In submitting professional accreditation reports to agencies, the institution commits to providing 

information about the institution’s mission, governance, academic programs, personnel, finances and 

constituencies.  As a means of providing consistent and accurate information to professional accrediting 

agencies, the academic unit preparing a professional accreditation report will either include in their 

submission a copy of the attached correspondence, which will be updated annually by the Provost’s 

Office, or will provide such information in the text of their report. 

Academic units must provide copies of all professional accreditation reports, including all 

correspondence between the academic unit and accrediting agency, to the Office of the Provost and the 

Office of Institutional Research, Effectiveness and Planning (IREP).  In addition to maintaining electronic 

copies of all accreditation reports and correspondence, IREP also serves academic units by providing and 

verifying data about enrollment, degrees, and faculty. 

 

 

                                                             
i See IHL Policies and Bylaws policies 507 and 508. 
ii See SACSCOC standards on Publication of accreditation status and Representation to other agencies. 


