
 
Accounting of Disclosures of PHI  

HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 02 
 
 

1  

 

 

Summary:  This policy outlines the rules for documenting releases of PHI to individuals 
other than the patient 
 
Affected Individuals:  Staff and patients at HIPAA covered entities  

 

1.0 PURPOSE 
 

The purpose of the University of Mississippi (UM) Accounting of Disclosures of 
Protected Health Information (PHI) Policy is to outline the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations for accounting of disclosures of (PHI) that 
have occurred for a period of up to six years prior to the date of the request. 

 
2.0 SCOPE 

 
University of Mississippi (UM) shall adhere to the regulations set forth by HIPAA to 
protect the privacy of health information. 

 
3.0 STANDARDS 

 
3.1 Documentation specifications of HIPAA: 

 
 A copy of the written accounting that is provided to the individual, as provided for 

in this policy should be kept for a period of six years. 
 

 The titles of the persons or offices responsible for receiving and processing 
requests for an accounting by individuals must be kept for six years. 

 
3.2 Accounting of Disclosures: 

 
3.2.a All requests for an accounting of disclosures should be sent to the Director of the 
HIPAA covered entity  where the records  were generated.



 
Accounting of Disclosures of PHI  

HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 02 
 
 

2  

 

 

3.2.b The requestor must include in the request a specific time frame for which he/she 
would like UM to make the accounting. For instance, the individual may request that we 
provide to him/her an accounting of disclosures made within the last three years. But, 
UM does not have to account for disclosures made more than six years prior to the date 
of the request and UM does not have to account for any disclosures made prior to April 
14, 2003, which is a date set by the HIPAA Privacy Standards. 

 
3.2.c The following information is required by HIPAA to be included in an accounting of 
disclosures: 

o The date of the disclosures; 
o The name of the entity or person who received the PHI and if known, the 

address of such entity or person; 
o A brief description of the PHI disclosed; and 
o A brief statement of the purpose of the disclosure that reasonably informs 

the individual of the basis for the disclosure or in lieu of such statement, a 
copy of a written request for disclosure, such as a request from the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services. 

 
3.2.d If, during the time period covered by the accounting, UM has made mul ti pl e  
 di scl osur es to the same person or entity for a singl e pu r pose pursuant to a singl e 
 au tho ri zation where the authorization asks for mul ti pl e copi es of th e same i nfo r mati on , 
UM can provide the following in its accounting: 

o The information required by 3.2.d above for the first disclosure; 
o The frequency, periodicity, or number of subsequent disclosures made 

during the accounting period; and the date of the last disclosure. 
 

3.3 Time limit on fulfilling request and charges associated with fulfilling requests: 

 UM will fulfill the individual’s request for an accounting no later than 60 days after 
the receipt of such a request; or 

 If for some reason, UM is unable to fulfill this request within 60 days, UM may 
extend the timeframe no more than 30 days. 

 UM will provide the individual with a written statement of the reasons for the 
delay and the date by which UM will provide the accounting. This written 
statement will be provided within the original 60-day timeframe. 

 UM will only request such extension only once per request. 

 UM will provide the first accounting in any 12-month period free of charge. For 
subsequent requests within the same 12-month period, UM will impose a 
reasonable cost-based fee. 

 All individuals will be notified in advance of such fees and will be provided with an 
opportunity to withdraw or modify any subsequent request for accountings in 
order to avoid or reduce the fee. 



 
Accounting of Disclosures of PHI  

HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 02 
 
 

3  

 

 

 
3.4 Exceptions to the accounting of disclosures: 
There are some disclosures that do no t have t o b e include d in the accounting of 
disclosures. These include: 

 Disclosures used to carry out treatment, payment and health care operations; 

 Disclosures made pursuant to an authorization signed by the individual or his/her 
representative; 

 Disclosures of PHI about an individual made to the individual; 

 Disclosures made through the facility directory; 

 Disclosures made to persons involved in the individual’s care; 

 Disclosures made for notification purposes, such as to assist law enforcement in 
notifying family members of an individual brought to the ER from an accident 
scene; 

 Disclosures for national security or intelligence purposes; 

 Certain disclosures to health oversight agencies and law enforcement officials.  
They have the right to request that UM suspend an individuals’ right to request an 
accounting of disclosures. The agency or law enforcement official can make the 
request orally or in writing.  The request must indicate that an accounting to the 
individual would be reasonably likely to impede the agency’s or law enforcement’s 
official activities.  This statement must also specify the time for which such a 
suspension is required.   

 

 

 
 




