
Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

1 
 

 
Summary:  This policy addresses the provision of PHI to patients upon 
request. 
 
Affected Individuals:  Staff in HIPAA covered entities, patients of HIPAA 
covered entities 
 
1.0 PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of the University of Mississippi (UM) Access, Uses and Disclosures of 
Protected Health Information (PHI) Policy is to guide patients on accessing their PHI 
and personnel in handling the requests made by individuals who wish to inspect and/or 
copy their PHI to protect the patient from release of PHI to unauthorized parties. 
 

2.0 SCOPE 
 
This policy applies to all individuals requesting in writing, using an Authorization to 
Release Information Form with the stated purpose “for individual’s use,” access to their 
records for the purpose of inspecting or obtaining a copy of their PHI and also to all UM 
employees making disclosures of PHI. 

 
3.0 STANDARDS 
 
Ownership of records – Clinical or medical records are the property of UM. 
 
Removal of hospital or clinic records – health records at HIPAA covered entitiesare not 
removed from those departments upon court order. 
 
Custodian – The directors of the individual HIPAA covered entities are the legal 
custodians of all health records in their respective departments. 
 
Legal adults – All students at UM are considered adults for purposes of giving consent 
for treatment and authorizing the release of medical information. 
 
HIPAA covered entity – Any department listed on the UM HIPAA Hybrid Policy as a 
covered entity that must comply with HIPAA regulations 
 

3.1 Patient Access 
 
Requests for access made by individuals who wish to inspect and/or obtain copies of 
their PHI must be made in writing in paper format on an Authorization for Release of 
Information Form.  
 

3.2 Accepting the request for access and timely action: 



Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

2 
 

 
Individual’s request for access – UM permits individuals to request to inspect or to 
obtain a copy of their own PHI, which is maintained in any UM HIPAA covered entity 
 
Notifying the Individual of Acceptance - If UM grants the request in whole or in part, it 
must inform the individual of the acceptance of the request and provide access 
requested. See section 3.3 for denying access. 
 
Timely action by UM: 
UM must provide access as requested by the individual within 30 days from the date the 
request is received.  If UM is unable to complete the request within 30 days, the time to 
complete the request may be extended to 60 days from the date of the original request 
provided the UM provides the requestor with a written statement of the reasons for the 
delay and the date by which the request will be completed.    

 
Allowing access - UM must, in the applicable time frame, arrange with the individual for 
a convenient time and place to inspect or obtain a copy of the PHI. At the individual’s 
request, UM may mail or fax a copy of the PHI. 
 
Form of access requested – UM must provide the individual with access to the PHI in 
the form or format requested by the individual, if it is readily producible in such form or 
format; or, if not, in a readable hard copy form and such other form or format as agreed 
to by UM and the individual.  If the requested PHI is maintained in an electronic format, 
UM shall provide the requestor with access to the PHI in the electronic form and format 
requested by the requestor, if it is readily producible in such form and format; or, if not, 
in a readable electronic form and format as agreed to by UM and the requestor. 

If the requestor directs UM to provide the copy of the PHI to another person, the 
requestor must designate such person in writing, must sign such request and clearly 
identify the designated person and where to send the copy of PHI. If such conditions are 
met, UM shall provide the designated person with a copy of the requested PHI. 
 
UM may provide the individual with a summary of the PHI requested, in lieu of providing 
access to the PHI or may provide an explanation of the PHI to which access has been 
provided, if 

The individual agrees in advance to such a summary or explanation; and 
The individual agrees in advance to the fees imposed, if any, by the covered 
entity for such summary or explanation. 
 

 
Fees – If the individual requests a copy of the PHI or agrees to a summary or 
explanation of such information, UM may impose a reasonable, cost-based fee, 
provided that the fee includes only the cost of: 

Copying, including the cost of supplies for and labor of copying, the PHI 
requested by the individual; 



Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

3 
 

Postage when the individual has requested the copy, or the summary or 
explanation, be mailed; and 
Preparing an explanation or summary of the PHI if agreed to by the 

individual. 

 
3.3 Reasons for denying access, under which an individual has the right 
to request a denial review: 
 
UM may deny an individual access provided that the individual is given the right to have 
such denials reviewed, in the following circumstances: 

A licensed health care professional has determined, in the exercise of 
professional judgment, that the access requested is reasonably likely to 
endanger the life or physical safety of the individual or another person. 
The PHI makes reference to another person (other than a health care 
provider) and a licensed health care professional has determined, in the exercise 
of professional judgment that the access requested is reasonably likely to cause 
substantial harm to such other person; or 
The request for access is made by the individual’s personal representative 
and a licensed health care professional has determined, in the exercise of 
professional judgment that the provision of access to such personal 
representative is reasonably likely to cause substantial harm to the individual or 
another person. 

 
3.4 Review of a denial of access: 
 
If access is denied on a ground as permitted above, the individual has the right to have 
the denial reviewed. The UM HIPAA Compliance Committee has been designated as 
the reviewing official by UM. UM will provide or deny access in accordance with the 
determination of the reviewing committee. The following requirements concerning 
denials will be met by UM: 

Making other information accessible – In instances where UM determines 
that access can be granted to at least a portion of the PHI requested, UM must, 
to the extent reasonably possible, give the individual access to any other PHI. 
Denial - UM must provide a timely, written denial to the individual. The denial 
must be in plain language and contain: 

o The basis for the denial; 

o If applicable, a statement of the individual’s review rights and a 

description of how to act upon those rights; and 

o A description of how the individual may complain to UM or to the 

Secretary of Health and Human Services. The description must include 
the name or title and the telephone number of the the Chair of the UM 
HIPAA Compliance Committee.  

Other Responsibility – If UM does not maintain the PHI that is the subject of 
the individual’s request for access and UM knows where the requested 



Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

4 
 

information is maintained, UM must inform the individual where to direct the 
request for access. 
Review of denial requested – The HIPAA Compliance Committee will review 
the requests and promptly provide notice to the individual of their determination.   

 
3.5 Uses and Disclosures of PHI 
 
Employee access - UM will make a reasonable effort to allow access only to the PHI 
employees need to fulfill their job duties. This includes PHI that is stored as a hard copy 
and/or electronically. For more information on the hospital medical record access, see 
UHC Policy on Medical Record Access and UM Policy on Minimum Necessary. 
 
Use and disclosure of PHI within UM - Except for psychotherapy notes, UM may use 
and disclose PHI that is included in our designated record set for the following purposes 
without written authorization from the patient or the patient’s legal representative: 
For treatment of UM’s patients; 
To seek payment for services rendered; and 
To carry out the healthcare operations of UM. 
 
Disclosures outside of UM - Except for psychotherapy notes, UM can release PHI to 
another healthcare provider (i.e. physician, hospital, etc.), clearinghouse (i.e. third party 
billing company), or a health plan, without an authorization, so long as the PHI is 
intended to be used: 

By a healthcare provider, outside of UM, for the treatment of the individual; 
For the payment activities of a healthcare provider, clearinghouse, or a 
health plan; 
For the healthcare operation activities of a healthcare provider, 
clearinghouse, or a health plan if: 

o UM and the receiving party has or had a relationship with the individual 

who is the subject of the information; 

o The PHI pertains to such relationship; and 

o The disclosure is for a purpose listed under the definition of healthcare 

operations. 
 
Uses and disclosures of psychotherapy notes - UM must obtain a separate and specific 
psychotherapy note authorization for any use or disclosure of psychotherapy notes 
except under the following circumstances: 

For use by the originator of the psychotherapy notes for treatment; 
For use or disclosure by UM in training programs in which students, trainees, 
or practitioners in mental health learn under supervision to practice or improve 
their skills in group, joint, family or individual counseling; 
For use or disclosure by UM to defend a legal action or other proceeding 
brought by the individual; 
For uses and disclosures made to a health oversight agency for oversight 
activities authorized by law with respect to the oversight of the originator of the 
psychotherapy notes, including audits, or criminal investigations, inspections, 



Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

5 
 

licensure or disciplinary actions, civil administrative, or criminal proceeding or 
actions; or any other activities necessary for appropriate oversight of: 

o The healthcare system; 

o Government benefit programs for which health information is relevant to 

beneficiary eligibility; 

o Entities subject to government regulatory programs for which health 

information is necessary for determining compliance with program 
standards; 

o Entities subject to civil rights laws for which health information is 

necessary for determining compliance; or 

o Uses and disclosures to coroners and medical examiners. 

When required by the US Secretary of Human Services to investigate or 
determine the covered entity’s compliance with this subpart; 
When the disclosure is required by law which includes the following: 

o Disclosures about victims of abuse, neglect and domestic violence – 

For more information, please see the UM Policy on Reporting Domestic 
Violence; 

o Disclosures for administrative or judicial proceedings - For more 

information, please see the UM Policy on Disclosures for Judicial and 
Administrative Proceedings; 

o Disclosures for Law Enforcement purposes – For more information, 

please see the UM policy on Reporting Incidents to Law Enforcement 
Agent. 

When the disclosure is intended to lessen a serious threat, UM may, 
consistent with applicable law and standards of ethical conduct, use or disclose 
PHI, if UM, in good faith, believes the use or disclosure is necessary to prevent 
or lessen a serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of a person or the 
public. Such release shall be only to a person(s) reasonably able to prevent or 

lessen the threat, including the target of the threat. Note: any such request 
should be referred to UM Office of General Counsel for review. 

 
Disclosures where a written authorization is not required – There are other disclosures 
that UM is required or permitted to make without an authorization and, with only a few 
exceptions, without an agreement or objection from the individual. 

Disclosures to public health authorities - UM is permitted to disclose PHI to 
public health authorities for the purpose of preventing or controlling disease, 
injury or disability, including, but not limited to, the reporting of disease, injury, 
vital events such as birth or death, and the conduct of public health surveillance, 
public health investigations, and public health interventions. The reporting of 
communicable diseases to the MS Department of Health, the maintenance of 
cancer and trauma registries would all be examples of disclosures made 
pursuant to this portion of the policy. 
Disclosures to avert a serious threat to health or safety – UM may consistent 
with applicable law and standards of ethical conduct, use or disclose PHI, if UM, 
in good faith believes: 



Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

6 
 

o The use or disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and 

imminent threat to the health or safety of a person or the public and is to a 
person reasonably able to prevent or lessen the threat, including the target 
of the threat; 

o The use or disclosure is necessary for law enforcement authorities to 

identify or apprehend an individual because of a statement by an 
individual admitting participation in a violent crime that UM reasonably 
believes may have caused serious physical harm to the victim; or 

o That the individual has escaped from a correctional institution or from 

lawful custody. 

Note: any such request should be referred to UM Office 
of General Counsel for review. 



 
Valid Authorizations - In accordance with HIPAA, all authorizations must contain six 
core elements and three statements to be considered a valid authorization. The original 
authorization is preferred, but copies are allowable so long as the authorization contains 
the core elements and statements as listed below: 
 

Required Elements: 

o A description of the information to be disclosed that identifies the 

information in a specific and meaningful fashion. NOTE: Psychotherapy 
(psychiatric) information can be disclosed only if such information is 
specifically requested in a separate psychotherapy note authorization. For 
more detailed information on the release of psychotherapy notes, see 
“Uses and disclosures of psychotherapy notes” stated earlier in this policy. 

o The name or other specific identification of the person(s) or class of 

persons (physician’s name, UHC, etc.) authorized to make the requested 
disclosure; 

o The name or specific identification of the person(s), or class of persons, 

to whom UM may make the requested disclosure; 

o A description of each purpose of the use or disclosure; 

o An expiration date or description of an event upon which the 

authorization will expire must be present on the authorization (UHC’s 
authorizations will have an expiration date of 6 months unless otherwise 
indicated); 

o Signature of the individual and date; and 

o If the authorization is signed by a legal representative (personal 

representative) of the individual, a description of such representative’s 
authority to act for the individual. 
 

Required Statements: 

o A statement of the individual’s right to revoke the authorization in writing 

and the exceptions to the right to revoke, together with a description of 
how the individual may revoke the authorization; 



Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

7 
 

o Treatment, payment, enrollment, or eligibility for benefits may not be 

conditioned on obtaining the authorization if such conditioning is prohibited 
by the Privacy Rule or, if conditioning is permitted, a statement about the 
consequences of refusing to sign the authorization. 

o A statement that information used or disclosed pursuant to the 

authorization may be subject to re-disclosure by the recipient and may no 
longer be protected by this rule; 

 
Invalid Authorizations - In accordance with HIPAA, any authorization lacking the above 
information is to be considered invalid and should not be fulfilled. 
 
Minimum Necessary – In accordance with the minimum necessary requirements of 
HIPAA, the UM employee fulfilling the authorization will disclose only that information 
specifically described in any written authorization, and/or court order. 
 
Verification - Information should be released only to the person or class of persons 
(person, firm or corporation) identified in the authorization to receive the information. All 
outside individuals who present to pick up a copy of protected health information must 
present a form of I.D. This I.D. may be a driver’s license, credentials or etc. This is 
needed to ensure that only the person or class of persons designated in the 
authorization as the recipient of an individual’s protected health information is who 
receives it. This includes those authorizations initiated by individuals who are seeking 
copies of their own protected health information. 
 
Faxing PHI – Faxing of PHI is discouraged and should be done on limited occasions.  
When it becomes necessary to obtain PHI through fax communication, the following 
information should be obtained from the requestor: (1) the name of the requestor; (2) a 
phone number at which the requestor can be reached; (3) a fax number; (4) a signed 
authorization, if applicable. Once the employee has retrieved the 
requested information: 

1. He/she should always verify the fax number before faxing; 
2. Complete a fax cover sheet that contains: 

a. The name of the person who is to receive the information; 
b. The intended fax number; 
c. The following disclaimer; and 

“Individuals who have received this information in error or are not authorized to 
receive it must promptly return or dispose of the information and notify the 
sender. Those individuals are hereby notified that they are strictly prohibited from 
reviewing, forwarding, printing, copying, distributing or using this information in 
any way.” 

d. The name and a return phone number of the UM employee who is 
faxing the information. 

 
 
Revoking an Authorization – An individual may revoke an authorization provided that 
the revocation is in writing, except to the extent that UM has taken action in reliance 



Access Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 01 

 

8 
 

thereon. All requests for revocations should be directed to the appropriate release of 
information personnel. 
 

4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 
For questions about the UM Access, Uses and Disclosures of Protected Health 
Information Policy or for more information, call the Office of General Counsel 


