
 
Disclosures of PHI to the FDA 

HIPAA Policy: Privacy 08 
 
 

1  

 

 

Summary: Explains the rules governing the disclosure of PHI to the Food and Drug 
Administration. 
 
Affected Individuals:  Staff at HIPAA covered entities; patients at HIPAA covered 
entities 

 

1.0 PURPOSE 
 

The purpose of this policy is to aid the University of Mississippi (UM) employees in 
making reports to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in a manner that is 
compliant with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 

 
2.0 SCOPE 

 
The UM Disclosures of Protected Health Information (PHI) to the Food and Drug 
Administration Policy applies to any UM employee required to report to the FDA. 

 
3.1 STANDARDS 

 
It is the policy of UM that disclosures to the FDA, in most cases, can be made without 
an authorization from the patient. This type of disclosure should be made only to a 
person subject to the jurisdiction of the FDA with respect to a FDA-regulated product or 
activity for which that person has responsibility. The information should be used for the 
purposes of public health activities only, such as activities related to the quality, safety, 
or effectiveness of a FDA-regulated product or activity. 

 
Examples of these purposes include but are not limited to the following: 

• Collecting or reporting adverse events (or similar activities regarding food or 
dietary supplements), product defects or problems (including problems with the 
use or labeling of a product) or biological product deviations; 

• Tracking FDA-regulated products; 
• Enabling product recalls, repairs, replacement, or lookback (including locating 

and notifying persons who have received products that have been withdrawn, 
recalled or are the subject of lookback); and 

• Conducting post-marketing surveillance. 



 
Disclosures of PHI to the FDA 

HIPAA Policy: Privacy 08 
 
 

2  

 

 

All disclosures reported to the FDA are subject to accounting requirements of the 
HIPAA. For this reason, a record will be kept of all PHI reported pursuant to this FDA 
disclosure policy. 

 
All reports made to a FDA-regulated person or entity, for the purposes of public health 
activities, will be documented, so that UM can account for these disclosures. 

 
4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 
For questions about the UM Disclosures of PHI to the FDA Policy or 
for more information, call the Office of General Counsel at 662-915-7014. 


