
Minimum Necessary Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 09 

 

1  

 

 

Summary:  Staff making required disclosures of PHI should limit the disclosure to the 
minimum amount of information necessary to achieve the intended purpose of the 
disclosure. 
 
Affected Individuals:  Staff at HIPAA covered entities 

 

1.0 PURPOSE 
 

To guide University of Mississippi (UM) employees at HIPAA covered entities in 
making reasonable efforts to limit disclosure of protected health information (PHI) to 
the minimum necessary  to accomplish the intended purpose of the use, disclosure or 
request and to comply with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) Privacy Regulations 45 CFR Part 164.502 and the Health Information 
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act. 

 

 
2.0 SCOPE 

 
The UM Minimum Necessary Uses and Disclosures of Protected Health Information 
Policy applies to any UM employee who releases PHI. 

 
3.1 STANDARDS 

 
When using or disclosing PHI or when requesting PHI from another healthcare provider, 
insurance plan or clearinghouse, UM will make reasonable efforts to limit PHI released 
or requested to the minimum necessary to accomplish the intended purpose, EXCEPT: 

 Uses or disclosures made pursuant to an authorization are not subject to 
minimum necessary. However, the following types of authorizations are 
exceptions and are subject to minimum necessary: 

o Authorizations for UM’s own uses 
o Authorizations for UM’s request for use or disclosure by others 
o Authorizations for research related treatment 

 Disclosures made to the Secretary of Health and Human Services as 
required by the HIPAA Privacy Regulation (are not subject to minimum 
necessary). 

 Uses or disclosures that are required by law (are not subject to minimum 
necessary). 



Minimum Necessary Uses Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 09 

 

2  

 

 

 Uses  or  disclosures  that  are  required  for  compliance  with  the  HIPAA 
Privacy Regulation (are not subject to minimum necessary). 

 
Disclosures, uses, and requests will be limited to a limited data set, as defined by 
HIPAA, to the extent practicable, and comply with any other regulations or guidance 
defining the “minimum necessary” issued by the secretary. 

 
The following standards have been created with regards to disclosures, uses, and 
requests made to Business Associates and other covered entities for the purposes of 
treatment and payment: 

 
Business Associates 

 
 PHI  released  to  Business  Associates  will  be  held  to  the  minimum 

necessary as stated in the Business Associate Contract. 
 

Releases to Other Covered Entities for Treatment and Payment Purposes 
 

 Treatment - Request from Provider 
UM has deemed all patient records requested by the treating provider, 
limited to one year prior to the request date, as the “minimum necessary” 
for continued patient treatment by the requestor. A patient/patient 
representative signed authorization must accompany any request for 
patient records greater than one year from the request date. 

 
 Payment - Request from Insurance Company 

UM has deemed any requested medical record documentation for the date 
of service for which payment is pending as the “minimum necessary” in 
order to receive payment. 
 

NOTE: *Restrictions – UM may not use or  disclose  PHI  in  violation  of  a restriction 
agreed to by UM. For more information on Restrictions, refer to Right to Request 
Restrictions Policy. 

 
4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 

 
For questions about the UM Minimum Necessary Uses and Disclosures of PHI 
Policy or for more information, call the Office of General Counsel at 662-915-7014. 




