
 
Requests by Individuals for Confidential Communications of PHI 

HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 13 
 
 

1  

 

 

Summary: Explains the process for requests that a HIPAA covered entity provide PHI to 
a patient by a different means of communication. 
 
Affected Individuals: Staff at HIPAA covered entities, patients of HIPAA covered entities 

 

1.0 PURPOSE 
 

The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the University of Mississippi’s HIPAA 
covered entities (UM) handle all requests for confidential communications in a 
manner compliant with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 

 

 
2.0 SCOPE 

 
The UM Requests by Individuals for Confidential Communications of His/Her 
Protected Health Information (PHI) Policy applies to any UM employee responsible for 
fulfilling confidential communication requests of PHI. 

 
3.1 STANDARDS 

 
It is the policy of UM to allow individuals to request that UM communicate their PHI 
to them by an alternative means and/or at an alternative location. UM does require 
the request to be in written paper format and contain the following information: 

 When applicable, an alternative means by which they would like to be 
contacted (i.e. phone rather than mail); 

 When applicable, an alternative phone number that UM can use to 
communicate with them; and 

 The requestor’s signature and date of request. 

 
All requests will be handled on a case by case basis. Requests should be sent to the 
UM HIPAA Compliance Committee. 

 
If the individual intends for UM to contact them by an alternative means, requests 
will automatically be denied if the individual fails to provide an alternative means of 
contact. 
 

If the individual intends for UM to contact him/her at a different phone number, a 
new number must be provided on their request. 



 
Requests by Individuals for Confidential Communications of PHI 

HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 13 
 
 

2  

 

 
 

 
 

4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 
 

For questions about the UM Requests by Individuals for Confidential 
Communications of His/Her PHI Policy or for more information, call the Office of 
General Counsel at 662-915-7014. 


