
Policy on HIPAA Compliant Research  
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 10 

 

1 
 

Summary: Outlines the rules for using protected health information from HIPAA 
covered entities in research. 
 
Affected Individuals:  Researchers intending to use protected health 
information, members of the UM Institutional Review Board, staff at HIPAA 
covered entities, patients at HIPAA covered entities 
  

1.0 PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of this policy is to guide University of Mississippi (UM) employees and 
students, who are involved with research, in obtaining an authorization for the use and 
disclosure of protected health information and/or a waiver in whole or in part of such 
authorization as required through the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA). 

 
2.0 SCOPE 
 
The UM Policy on HIPAA Compliant Research applies to any UM employee or student 
involved in obtaining an authorization or waiver for research purposes. 

 
3.0 STANDARDS 
 
Research conducted pursuant to an authorization from the participant – It is UM policy 
that investigators of research studies involving human participants obtain a HIPAA 
compliant authorization from the participant upon enrollment in the study.  The 
authorization may be combined with other types of written permissions, including the 
informed consent document for the study, but all core elements and statements, as 
listed in section 3.1 below must be included. 
 
Research conducted pursuant to a waiver in whole or in part of the authorization 
requirement – It is UM policy to allow investigators to seek a waiver, from the UM 
Institutional Review Board (IRB), in whole or in part of the authorization requirement.  
The primary investigators seeking such a waiver should follow the waiver request 
procedures as listed in section 3.2. 
 
Research using a limited data set – It is UM policy that in some cases, researchers 
seeking PHI from UM can perform the research without an authorization from the 
participant or a HIPAA waiver from the IRB, if he/she plans to use a limited data set.  
The researcher may simply request PHI from the covered entity with only limited 
identifying information on it.  If the researcher wishes to do this, then he/she must enter 
into a data use agreement with UM.  A data use agreement assures appropriate use of 
the PHI by the researcher and that the researcher will not identify the information or 
contact the individuals.  See section 3.3 below for more information on what identifiers 
must be removed before the PHI will be considered a limited data set. 



Policy on HIPAA Compliant Research  
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 10 

 

2 
 

 
3.1 Authorizations – Research authorizations should be signed by each participant 
that enrolls in a study, unless the IRB grants in whole or in part a waiver to the 
authorization requirement.  The authorization should provide the researcher the 
permission needed to use and disclose PHI for the research project.  The authorization 
must contain the following core elements and statements: 

 A description of the information to be used and/or disclosed that identifies 
the information in a specific and meaningful fashion. 

NOTE: Psychotherapy (psychiatric) information can be disclosed 
only if such information is specifically requested in the 
authorization.  For more detailed instructions on how to handle the 
release of psychotherapy notes, see section 3.6 of Access, Uses & 
Disclosures of PHI Policy; 

 The name or other specific identification of the person(s), or class of 
persons, authorized to make requested disclosure; 

 The name or other specific identification of the person(s), or class of 
persons, to whom UM may make the requested disclosure – this should 
include all person(s) or entities to whom UM may disclose the PHI created 
through the research project.  For example: an authorization form for a 
multi-center study should list all entities who are participating in the study 
and may therefore have access to the PHI during the research study; 

 A description of each purpose of the use or disclosure; 

 An expiration date or a description of an event upon which the authorization 
will expire must be on the authorization; if applicable.  It is allowable for the 
authorization to simply state “the end of the study”.  If the primary 
investigator decides that the research project will not have an expiration 
date or event, then the authorization must state this fact.  This allows the 
researcher to use the information after the research study has ended; 

 Signature of the individual and date; and 

 If the authorization is signed by a legal representative (personal 
representative), or guardian of the individual, a description of such 
representative’s or guardian’s authority to act for the individual must be 
provided or noted. 

 
Required Statements: 

 A statement of the individual’s right to revoke the authorization in writing 
and the exceptions to the right to revoke, together with a description of 
how the individual may revoke the authorization.  Although a patient can 
revoke his/her authorization, the researcher can still use and disclose 
that information collected prior to receiving the revocation, to the extent 
necessary to preserve the integrity of the research study. 

 A statement that treatment, payment, and enrollment will be conditioned 
upon obtaining the signature of the participant and that refusal to sign 
the consent will prohibit the participant from participating in the study; 
and 



Policy on HIPAA Compliant Research  
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 10 

 

3 
 

 A statement that information used or disclosed pursuant to the 
authorization may be subject to re-disclosure by the recipient and may 
no longer be protected by this rule. 

 

The authorization may be a separate document or it may be combined with any other 
type of written permission for the same research study, such as the informed consent or 
another authorization for the same research study. When combined it must be clear to 
the participant the component of the research for which authorization is required 
(conditioned) in order to participate, versus the components of the research that are 
optional (unconditioned). It must be clear to the participant that participation in the 
unconditioned component is optional.   
 
An authorization for research involving psychotherapy notes can only be combined with 
other authorizations to use or disclose psychotherapy notes.  
 
Authorizations including a statement for future research must adequately describe such 
purposes such that it would be reasonable for the participant to expect that his/her PHI 
could be used or disclosed for future research.  
 
As is currently done with the informed consent, the authorization must be included in the 
material submitted to the IRB for approval before it can be used.  Where authorization is 
required, no research should be conducted prior to obtaining authorization from the 
participant. 
 
3.2 Waivers – It is the policy of UM to allow researchers to seek a waiver in whole or in 
part of the authorization requirement.  To qualify for such a waiver, the researcher must 
obtain approval from the IRB.  The documentation must show the three defined waiver 
criteria, as listed in bullets below, have been sufficiently met by the researcher.  The 
researcher must describe in as specific detail as possible how he/she plans to meet 
each of the waiver criteria below.  If the IRB agrees that the researcher has met the 
criteria, the IRB must document as such. 
Waiver criteria: 

 The use or disclosure of PHI involves no more than a minimal risk to the privacy 
of individuals based on at least the presence of the following elements: 

o An adequate plan to protect the identifiers from improper use and 
disclosure; 

o An adequate plan to destroy the identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
consistent with conduct of the research unless there is a health or research 
justification for retaining the identifiers or such retention is otherwise 
required by law; 

o Adequate written assurances that the PHI will not be reused or disclosed to 
any other person or entity, except as required by law, for authorized 
oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or 
disclosure of PHI would be permitted; 

 The research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver or alteration; 
and 



Policy on HIPAA Compliant Research  
HIPAA Policy:  Privacy 10 

 

4 
 

 The research could not practicably be conducted without access to and use of the 
PHI. 

 
3.3 Research using a limited data set – To be considered a limited data set, the 
following information must be removed from the PHI, before it is disclosed to a 
researcher: 
 

Names Account numbers 

Postal address information, other than 
town or city, state and zip code 

Certificate/license numbers 

Telephone numbers Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, 
including license plate numbers 

Fax numbers Device identifiers and serial numbers 

Electronic mail address Web universal resource locators 

Social security numbers Internet protocol address numbers 

Medical record numbers Biometric identifiers, including finger 
and voice prints 

Health plan beneficiary members Full face photographic images and any 
comparable images 

 
3.4 Disclosures of PHI to a researcher for purposes of developing a research 
protocol or to be used by the researcher for research that will be conducted on 
only decedents’ information – Certain representations, as described in bullets below, 
must be received from the researcher, before the disclosure can occur.   
These representations should be made by completing a data use agreement and 
submitting the information to the area from which the information is being sought.   

 
3.5 Creation of Research Databases – Databases created specifically for research 
purposes can be created with an authorization from each patient included in the database, 
pursuant to a waiver in whole or in part to the authorization requirement. 

o Databases compiled pursuant to patient authorization: 
o Authorization is for use and disclosure of PHI to create a database 

or to manipulate PHI to create a database or to bank tissue for future 
research; 

o Authorization is not for use or disclosure for a specific protocol. 
o Databases created under a waiver of authorization from the IRB: 

o Waiver can only be granted if the researcher represents to the IRB 
that the database is solely for the manipulation or storage of the PHI, 
not for use in a specific protocol. 

 
4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
For questions about the UM Policy on HIPAA Compliant Research or for more 
information, call the Institutional Review Board at 662-915-7482 or the Office of General 
Counsel at 662-915-7014.  




