
 
Patients Request to Amend their PHI 

HIPAA Policy: Privacy 14 
 
 

1  

 

 

Summary: Explains the process by which patients can request that their PHI held by 
HIPAA covered entities be amended 
 
Affected Individuals: Staff at HIPAA covered entities; patients of HIPAA covered entities 

 

1.0 PURPOSE 
 

The purpose of the University of Mississippi (UM) Patient’s Request to Amend their 
Protected Health Information (PHI) Policy is to ensure that individuals are provided a 
right to request amendments to their PHI. The HIPAA Compliance Committee will 
coordinate with the Office of General. Counsel and any other necessary staff or 
departmental service in order to receive and process amendment requests by 
individuals. 

 
2.0 SCOPE 

 
The UM Patient’s Request to Amend their PHI Policy applies to any individual 
requesting that an amendment be made to his/her PHI. 

 
3.1 STANDARDS 

 
3.2 UM’s Policy concerning requests for amendment(s) is as follows: 

 UM does allow individuals (patients) to request that amendments be made to 
his/her PHI.  UM is not required to agree to the request. 

 In cases where the individual’s request is denied, UM allows the individual to 
submit to UM a statement of disagreement. 

 If the individual does not submit a statement of disagreement, the individual is 
still allowed the right to request in writing that UM provide the denial with any 
future disclosures of PHI that is the subject of the amendment. 

 In cases where the individual does submit a statement of disagreement, UM 
has the right to prepare a rebuttal statement in response to the individual’s 
statement of disagreement. If asked by the individual, UM may or may not 
link the individual’s request, UM’s letter of denial, the individual’s statement 
of disagreement, if any, and the covered entities rebuttal, if any, to the PHI 
subject to the request. 



 
Patients Request to Amend their PHI 

HIPAA Policy: Privacy 14 
 
 

2  

 

 

 In cases where UM agrees to the request, UM will adhere to it. 

 UM will act on original requests within sixty (60) days of its receipt or 
request an extension within the sixty days. This extension will not exceed an 
additional thirty (30) days. 

 
3.3 Making a Request: 
An individual may make a request for amendments in writing at anytime. The patient may 
provide the request to the director of the relevant covered HIPAA entity. The director will pass 
the request to the HIPAA Compliance Committee along with the director’s recommendation 
to grant or deny the request. 

 
Valid requests must, at a minimum: 

 Identify the spe ci fi c PHI to which the individual desires a change; 

 Specify the reason for the requested change; and 

 Provide the information that the individual believes to be correct (i.e. if a 
patient’s age is misstated in a record and the patient requests that it be 
corrected, the patient must supply us with the correct age). 

 
3.4 Timely action by UM: 
UM will act on the individual’s request for an amendment no later than 60 days after 
receipt of such a request.  If during the 60 days it is determined that additional time is 
needed in order to respond to the request, UM must provide the individual with a written 
statement of the reasons for the delay and the date by which UM will complete its action 
on the request.  The extension will not exceed 30 days from the date of the written 
statement for which the extension is made. 

 
3.5 Reviewing the request: 
The HIPAA Compliance Committee will review the PHI that the individual wants to be 
amended and make a decision on whether or not UM should agree to the amendment, 
using the guidelines in 3.5 below. 



 
Patients Request to Amend their PHI 

HIPAA Policy: Privacy 14 
 
 

3  

 

 

 

3.6 Guidelines for making a decision: 
The following are grounds on which UM may base a denial of a request: 

 If it is found that the PHI subject to the amendment was not created by 
UM, unless the individual provides a reasonable basis to believe that the 
originator of the PHI is no longer available to take action on the 
requested amendment; 

 The PHI subject to the amendment is found not to be part of UM’s 
designated record set; 

 The PHI subject to the amendment is not available for inspection under 
HIPAA (i.e. information is involved in a legal claim and etc); and 

 The PHI is determined to be accurate and complete and does not warrant 
a change. 

 
3.7 Informing those person(s) or entities identified by either UM or 
the patient as needing the corrected PHI: 

 If UM agrees to an amendment, UM must identify persons, including 
business associates that UM knows have the PHI that is the subject of the 
amendment and that may have relied or could foreseeably rely on such 
information to the detriment of the individual. UM must then obtain 
authorization from the individual to provide the amendment within a 
reasonable time to those identified. 

 UM must also allow the individual a chance to identify persons whom the 
individual feels should be provided the amendment. In cases where the 
individual does identify persons who need the amendment, UM should 
obtain authorization from the individual to provide the amendment to the 
person(s). 

 Documentation must be kept to show who was provided the amendment. 



 
Patients Request to Amend their PHI 

HIPAA Policy: Privacy 14 
 
 

4  

 

 

4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 

 
For questions about the UM Patient’s Request to Amend their PHI Policy or for more 
information, call the Office of General Counsel at 662-915-7014. 


