
Securing Work Areas to Prevent Unauthorized Use 
HIPAA Policy: Privacy 16 

 

1 
 

Summary:  Instructions for keeping both electronic and paper PHI safe from 
disclosure in work areas. 
 
Affected Individuals: Staff at HIPAA covered entities 
 
1.0 PURPOSE 
 
The University of Mississippi (UM) has a duty to its patients to keep all protected health 
information (PHI) secure and accessible only to those individuals who need it.  Not only 
does this include securing PHI from visitors and other patients, but it also includes 
making sure that only the employees who need the information to perform their job 
duties have access to it.  Therefore, the intent of this policy is to guide employees in 
taking steps to ensure that their work areas are secure. 

 
2.0 SCOPE 
 
The UM Policy on Securing Work Areas to Prevent Unauthorized Use or Disclosure of 
PHI applies to all UM employees in HIPAA covered entities. 

 
3.0 STANDARDS 
 
Guidelines: 
The following guidelines are to be used to safeguard patient information from 
unintentional uses and disclosures.  The procedures are categorized by common work 
area usage. 

 Safeguarding Workstation Peripherals (computers, monitors, printers, fax 
machines, etc.): 
Workstations, especially those located in-patient care areas, should have 
limited access.  The following steps must be taken to ensure that workstations 
are secure: 

o All employees should return to screen saver status when he/she has 
completed their work and/or plans to leave the computer unattended. 

o Monitors should be turned so that the visibility of the screen is 
reasonably limited to the employee who is actually using the computer. 

o Printers, whether located in patient care areas or offices, should be 
positioned in such a way as to prohibit unauthorized individuals from 
accessing the information that is printed.  For example: because in 
many patient care areas, lab results are printed on an almost 
continuous basis, it is essential that all printers be positioned away 
from the counter where visitors may stand while waiting to speak to a 
nurse or unit secretary. 

o Employees should remove patient information from fax machines, 
printers, copiers, etc. as soon as he/she has finished using the 
equipment. For example: an employee who is printing patient 



Securing Work Areas to Prevent Unauthorized Use 
HIPAA Policy: Privacy 16 

 

2 
 

information on a printer used by others should remove the printed 
information as soon as possible so that others cannot inadvertently get 
the information. 

 

 Safeguarding Patient Information on Paper (i.e. the medical record, lab 
reports, etc.): 

o A patient’s medical record should not be left open after use.  The 
medical records should be kept in an area that is not accessible to 
visitors.  Loose papers (i.e. lab reports, ECG readings) that have not 
been filed into a patient’s chart should be placed in a secured area, 
until they are properly filed. 

o In most clinic areas, charts are placed outside the exam room, either in 
a holder on the exam room door or on the wall next to the door, for a 
healthcare provider to easily access.  In clinics where this is common 
practice, the employees must ensure that the chart is positioned so the 
patient name or other identifying information, which might be on the 
chart, is not visible to unauthorized individuals.  Often times, a clinic 
encounter form is pre-stamped with the patient name, medical record 
number, etc.  Therefore, if a clinic’s routine practice is to clip encounter 
forms to the front of the chart for the healthcare provider’s 
convenience, then the employee placing the chart outside the exam 
room, should ensure that the encounter form is turned where it is not 
visible to unauthorized individuals. 

o No patient information should be thrown into the trash.  Patient 
information that is to be discarded should be shredded, either manually 
or by a shredder. 

 

 Safeguarding Information Discussed During Phone Calls and While Dictating: 
o Employees should be conscious of the presence of others when using 

the phone.  It is essential that when discussing PHI over the phone, 
employees make a reasonable effort to minimize the opportunity for 
the conversation to be overheard.  For example: Employees in patient 
care areas should use the phones located in areas away from counters 
where patients or visitors might stand, if such a phone is available. 

o Healthcare providers should be conscious of others when dictating.  
He/she must take reasonable steps to ensure that the chances of 
being overheard are limited. 

 

 Safeguarding Sign-in Sheets/”White Boards”/Address-o-graph Cards/X-ray 
Light Boards: 

o All patient sign-in sheets, such as those used in most clinic areas, 
should contain only the following information: 

 Patient’s name; 
 Appointment time; and 
 Sign-in time. 



Securing Work Areas to Prevent Unauthorized Use 
HIPAA Policy: Privacy 16 

 

3 
 

No diagnostic information, clinic names (i.e. infectious disease 
clinic, OB/GYN clinic, etc.) or healthcare provider names should be 
on the sign-in sheet. 

o “White Boards” or other such objects, normally used in clinic areas to 
inform the staff in what rooms their patients are located, can be used, 
but should be kept in such a manner as to deter those without a need 
to know, from viewing the information on the board. 

o Many patient care areas have X-ray light boards.  The employees in 
these areas must make reasonable efforts to ensure that those without 
a need to know are prohibited from viewing the radiographs.  For 
example: If an X-ray light board is located in a hallway of a clinic, 
where visitors and patients normally pass through, employees should 
ensure that the radiographs are removed from the board once they 
have finished viewing them. 

 

 Safeguarding PHI During Equipment Repairs: 
Occasionally, equipment such as copiers, fax machines, etc. must undergo 
maintenance or repairs.  In some work areas, this type of equipment is 
located where patient information is also maintained or created, such as in a 
room that houses a department’s medical records.  When such instances 
occur, it is essential that the appropriate personnel ensure that PHI located in 
the area is secure.  The following is a listing of simple steps that, at a 
minimum, should be taken to ensure that while maintenance or repairs are 
being performed, patient information not be inappropriately accessed: 

o Take reasonable steps to ensure that patient information located in the 
areas is not accessible to the visitor.  For example: no loose 
information, such as lab reports, should be left lying out; 

o Have an employee repeatedly visit the area to verify that the visitor is 
not improperly accessing PHI. 

 

 Safeguarding PHI on Lab Samples/Drug Carts: 
o When lab samples are drawn, the samples should be placed in a 

secure location.  For example: employees should not place lab 
samples at the front counter, where patients and visitors may stand. 

 
Though this policy and its guidelines do not cover every activity that could take place in 
most work areas, it is important that every employee take reasonable steps to ensure 
that all PHI remains confidential.  Within reason, incidental uses and disclosures must 
be avoided. 

 
4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 
For questions about the UM Policy on Securing Work Areas to Prevent Unauthorized 
Use or Disclosure of PHI or for more information, call the Office of General Counsel at 
662-915-7014. 
 


