
 
Business Continuity Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 04 

1  

 
 

Summary:  Outlines emergency management requirements for HIPAA systems 
 
Affected Individuals:  HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 
 
Purpose of Policy 
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that strategies and plans are in place to counteract interruptions to 
the University of Mississippi’s (UM) activities and to protect critical business processes from the effects of 
major failures of information systems or disasters (e.g., fire, power or communications blackout, tornado, 
hurricane, flood, earthquake, civil disturbance, hacking or other security attacks etc.) and to ensure their 
timely resumption. 

 
Definitions 
For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 
This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA hybrid 
policy.  

This policy applies to all workforce members, users, and all personnel affiliated with third parties who 
access or use UM’s information assets, regardless of physical location. 

 
Information assets include all UM owned, licensed, leased, or managed hardware and software, and 
use of the UM network via a physical or wireless connection, regardless of the ownership of the 
computing device connected to the network. 

 
Policy 

A. Business Continuity Management Policy 

1. UM develops, implements, tests, and maintains a Business Continuity Plan (BCP) that 
covers all information assets that deliver or support core critical business functions. 

2. The BCP ensures that UM maintains compliance with statutory requirements (e.g., 
HIPAA, HITRUST, PCI, applicable state regulations, etc.) during and after a business 
disruption. 



 
Business Continuity Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 04 

2  

 
 

B. Business Impact Analysis 

1. UM conducts a risk assessment of events that can cause interruptions to its operational 
processes and identifies, estimates, and prioritizes risks to these processes. 

2. UM conducts a business impact analysis to identify critical operational processes and to 
determine recovery criticality. 

 UM identifies outage impacts and estimated down time. 
 UM shall identify resource requirements. 
 UM shall identify recovery priorities for critical systems. 
 System criticality should be determined and documented based on tolerance and impact 

to your business unit / department for unplanned interruptions of normal business 
operations. The reference scales below should be used for a baseline: 

 
The business unit / department impact will be felt within:  
 1 hours of an interruption = Critical 
 8 hours of an interruption = Important 
 24 hours of an interruption = Non-critical 

 

System Type Impact 

Telecom / Network Critical 

Data Center Critical 

EHR Important 

Medical Devices Important 

Workstations Non-critical 

Scheduling / Billing Non-critical 

Other Non-critical 
 

3. UM identifies mitigation options, steps, and costs. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 
Business Continuity Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 04 

3  

 

C. Design and Develop the Business Continuity Plan 

1. UM develops and implements the BCP to ensure UM can restore operations and establish 
availability of information in the required time frame following interruption to, or failure 
of, critical operational business processes. 

2. UM identifies roles and responsibilities and designates the BCP owner. 

3. UM develops backup and recovery strategies for information assets according to the 
Information Backup and Storage Policy. 

4. UM ensures the secure protection of confidential data, and ensures that confidentiality, 
accessibility and integrity are preserved. 

5. UM identifies and implements an alternate, geographically-separated site for back-up 
and recovery continuity support, including equipment and budget for the site. 

6. UM develops BCP activation criteria including notification and escalation plans. 

7. UM develops BCP deactivation criteria including notification of the return to normal 
operations and clean up procedures. 



 
Business Continuity Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 04 

4  

 
 

D. Implement the Business Continuity Plan 

1. UM prepares emergency response procedures and checklists. 

2. UM prepares detailed recovery procedures and checklists. 

3. UM stores the BCP in a geographically separate remote location. 

4. UM develops a BCP distribution list and distributes copies of the BCP to key contingency 
personnel. 

5. UM provides business continuity and crisis management awareness to all workforce 
members on an annual basis. 

E. Testing the Business Continuity Plan 

1. UM tests the BCP annually at a minimum, to ensure that it is up-to-date and effective. 

2. UM defines testing exercises and testing scenarios. 

3. UM ensures that all workforce members can perform their roles and carry out their 
responsibilities when the BCP is activated. 

4. UM evaluates the results of BCP tests and provides a report to the Leadership Team, 
including improvement recommendations and resource requirements. 

F. Maintaining the Business Continuity Plan 

1. UM reviews and updates the BCP at a minimum annually. 

2. UM updates the BCP with lessons learned during the testing exercises. 

3. UM updates the BCP upon acquisition of new equipment, upgrading of systems, or other 
business events including but not limited to the following: 

 Changes in personnel, location, facilities, or resources 
 Revisions in legislation 



 
Business Continuity Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 04 

5  

 

 Updated processes and procedures 
 Changes to operational and financial risk 

4. UM distributes the updated BCP to key contingency personnel on the BCP distribution 
list. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 
The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has general responsibility for the implementation and 
enforcement of this policy. 

 
Future Revisions 
UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approved by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 
Sanctions 
Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 

 
Exceptions 
Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 



 
Business Continuity Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 04 

 

 

Regulatory and Standards References 
The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 
• HIPAA Regulatory Reference: HIPAA § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A), HIPAA § 164.308(a)(7)(i), 

HIPAA § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(A), HIPAA § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(B), HIPAA § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(C), 
HIPAA § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(D), HIPAA § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(E), HIPAA § 164.310(a)(2)(i), 
HIPAA § 164.310(d)(2)(iv), HIPAA § 164.312(a)(2)(ii), HIPAA § 164.312(c)(1) 

• HITRUST Reference: 12.a Including Information Security in the Business Continuity 
Management Process, 12.b Business Continuity and Risk Assessment, 12.c Developing and 
Implementing Continuity Plans Including Information Security, 12.d Business Continuity 
Planning Framework, 
12.e Testing, Maintaining and Re-Assessing Business Continuity Plans 

• PCI Reference: PCI DSS v3 12.10.1 
 

Related Documents: 
 

• Business Continuity Plan 
• Business Impact Analysis 
• Disaster Recovery Plan 
• Glossary 
• Information Backup and Storage Policy 

 
Approval 

 
 
 
 

Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 
 


	Purpose of Policy
	Definitions
	Scope
	Policy
	Policy Compliance Enforcement
	Future Revisions
	Sanctions
	Exceptions
	Regulatory and Standards References
	Approval

