
 

Endpoint Protection 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 17 

 

 1  

 

Summary:  Methods for improving endpoint security in HIPAA covered entities 

 
Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to establish the methods for improving the security of endpoints through 
effective security configuration, malware detection, and malware prevention. 

 

Policy Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA hybrid 
policy. All workforce members and users, including third parties, who may have access or exposure to 
University of Mississippi (UM) data are required to comply with this policy. 

 

All UM workforce members and users must take responsibility for minimizing the risk of their 
computing device infecting other systems or shared files on a server. 

 

Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 

Policy Statement 

A. Controls Against Malicious Code 

1. Detection, prevention, and recovery controls shall be implemented to protect against 
malicious code. 

2. All computing devices, including personally owned devices, that connect to the UM 
network shall have appropriate anti-malware software installed and running at all times. 

3. Where possible, anti-malware software shall ensure that updates are automatically 
applied within 24 hours of availability. 

4. Where possible, anti-malware software shall automatically conduct scans of computing 
devices on boot and at least once every 24 hours. 



 

Endpoint Protection 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 17 

 

 2  

 

5. Where automatic updates and scans are not possible, users shall be responsible for 
initiating the scan and updating the software to protect against the latest threats. 

6. Anti-malware software shall be configured to scan downloads from external sources as 
they are downloaded and prevent infected files from opening or executing. 

7. Anti-malware software shall maintain logs of all scans in accordance with to the Audit, 
Logging, and Monitoring Policy. 

8. Anti-malware software shall automatically clean and remove or quarantine malicious 
code. Infected computing devices shall be removed from the UM network until they are 
verified as safe. 

 

B. Third Parties 

1. All third party laptops shall have up-to-date anti-malware software installed prior to 
connecting to the UM network. 

C. Training and Awareness 

1. User awareness and training on malicious code detection and prevention shall be 
provided in accordance with the Privacy and Security Awareness and Training Policy. 

D. Acceptable Use 

1. All users shall take reasonable measures to protect against the installation of unlicensed 
or unauthorized software in accordance with the Information Technology Acceptable 
Use Policy. 

2. All users are strictly prohibited from conducting any activities with the intention of 
creating and/or distributing malicious programs using UM network (e.g., viruses, 



 

Endpoint Protection 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 17 

 

 3  

 

worms, Trojan Horses, etc.) in accordance with the Information Technology Acceptable 
Use Policy. 

E. Operating Systems 

1. Operating systems shall be maintained by applying any service packs, patches, or 
security updates in accordance with the Change Management Policy. 

2. Where possible, Operating System updates shall be provided automatically. Users must 
follow directions from User Support when Operating System updates are distributed. 

3. The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) must ensure, where feasible, that all users 
apply Operating System updates to their computing devices as soon as possible. 

4. Unmanaged computing devices which become a security risk to the UM environment 
shall be disconnected from the UM network. 

5. Operating Systems which no longer have security updates available to fix vulnerabilities 
shall be upgraded to a currently supported Operating System. If this is not possible or 
practical, the risk shall be documented and measures taken to reduce and mitigate that 
risk. The CISO shall determine the risk level and shall issue a waiver in cases where such 
a waiver is warranted in accordance with the Information Security Waiver Policy. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The CISO or designee has general responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approval by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 



 

Endpoint Protection 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 17 

 

 4  

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 

Regulatory References 

HIPAA Regulatory Reference: HIPAA § 164.308(a)(5)(ii)(B) 
HITRUST Reference: 09.j Controls Against Malicious Code 
PCI References: PCI DSS v3.1 5.1, PCI DSS v3 5.1.1, PCI DSS v3.1 5.2 

 

Related Documents 

 
Information Technology Acceptable Use Policy 
Audit, Logging, and Monitoring Policy 
Change Management Policy 
Endpoint Protection Procedures 
Glossary 
Mobile Computing Device Security Policy 

Privacy and Security Awareness and Training Policy 



 

Endpoint Protection 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 17 

 

 

 

Approval 
 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 

 
 


