
 

Security Awareness and Training  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 06 

 

 

 

 

Summary:  Outlines requirements for security training for HIPAA covered 

entities and the IT staff who support those units   
 

Affected Individuals:  Employees of HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to ensure security awareness and training programs are developed and 
implemented, including in-depth training for personnel with significant information security responsibilities. 

 

University of Mississippi (UM) is committed to ensuring that workforce members are properly trained 
and made aware of security policies, procedures, potential threats, and security incidents. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA hybrid 
policy.  

This policy applies to all workforce members, users and all personnel affiliated with third parties 
regardless of physical location. 

 
Policy 

A. Training and Awareness Policy 

1. UM develops and implements training to ensure that all workforce members and third 
party users are aware of the security risks associated with their activities and of the 
applicable laws, directives, policies, standards, instructions, regulations, and procedures. 

2. UM implements strategies for protecting information assets and confidential data 
including security awareness, education, and training. 

3. UM provides specialized training for workforce members whose job functions require 
specialized skill or knowledge in information security. 



 

Security Awareness and Training  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 06 

 

 

 

4. UM retains records of all training activities. 

5. UM conducts an annual review of the effectiveness of its training and awareness 
activities. 

B. Information Security Training 

1. Prior to being granted access to UM’s confidential information, workforce members and 
third party users: 

 Receive security training 
 Acknowledge receipt of such training 
 Acknowledge awareness of responsibilities under UM’s policies regarding 

confidential information. 

2. All workforce members and third party users receive security training as part of initial 
training for new users, when required by system changes, and annually thereafter. 

3. All workforce members and third party users receive training on UM’s policies and 
procedures no later than 30 days after hire and annually thereafter. 

4. Managers ensure that their workforce members receive sufficient training to remain up-to- 
date on issues, requirements, expectations, and procedures for protecting information 
assets. 

5. UM maintains ongoing security awareness by publishing security bulletins and posters, 
conducting safety fairs, ad-hoc presentations, or monthly meetings. 

6. UM reviews training materials on an annual basis or whenever there is a change in 
regulatory controls and updates as necessary. 

7. Workforce members acknowledge that they have received security training and are aware 
of their responsibilities by signing an acceptance or acknowledgement of their security 
responsibilities. 



 

Security Awareness and Training  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 06 

 

 

 

C. Information Security Workforce Members Training 

1. All information security workforce members receive specialized training regarding their 
roles and responsibilities as part of their initial training, when required by system changes, 
and annually thereafter. 

2. UM provides or coordinates training for workforce members whose job functions require 
special knowledge of security threats, risks, vulnerabilities, techniques, and safeguards. This 
training focuses on expanding knowledge, skills, and abilities for workforce members who 
are assigned information security roles and/or responsibilities. 

3. All information security workforce members receive specialized training prior to accessing 
information assets. A refresher training course will also need to be completed annually by all 
information security workforce members. 

4. All information security workforce members receive regular updates regarding policies and 
procedures relevant to their job function. 

D. Incident Response Training 

1. All workforce members and third party users receive mandatory incident response training 
within 90 days of assuming an incident response role or responsibility, when required by 
system changes, and annually thereafter according to the Incident Management Policy. 

E. Information Technology (IT) Acceptable Use Training 

1. Workforce members shall receive training on the acceptable uses of information assets in 
accordance with the IT Acceptable Use Policy prior to being granted access to UM’s 
information assets. 

2. At a minimum, Workforce Members receive training and periodical reminders: 

a. To not leave confidential data on system output devices (e.g., copiers, printers, and 
facsimile machines). 



 

Security Awareness and Training  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 06 

 

 

 

b. That facsimile machines and photocopiers have page caches and may store pages in 
case of a paper or transmission fault, which may later be printed in full view once the 
fault is cleared. 

c. Regarding using facsimile machines securely, namely to avoid: 

 Sending documents and messages to the wrong number either by misdialing or 
using the wrong stored number. 

 Unauthorized access to built-in message stores while retrieving messages. 
 Deliberate or accidental programming of machines to send messages to specific 

numbers. 

d. Not to use UM demographic data for personal use. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has general responsibility for the implementation and 
enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy with committee approval at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 



 

Security Awareness and Training  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 06 

 

 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 

 HIPAA Regulatory References: HIPAA §164.308 (a)(5)(i), HIPAA §164.308 (a)(5)(ii)(A), HIPAA 
§164.308 (a)(5)(ii)(B), HIPAA §164.308 (a)(6)(i), HIPAA §164.308 (a)(7)(ii)(D), HIPAA §164.310(b), 
HIPAA §164.414(a), HIPAA §164.530(b) 

 HITRUST References: 02.e Information Security Awareness, Education and Training, 09.s 
Information Exchange Policies and Procedures 

 PCI References: PCI DSS v3 4.1, PCI DSS v3 4.1.1, PCI DSS v3 6.5, PCI DSS v3 9.9, PCI DSS v3 9.9.3, 
PCI DSS v3 12.6, PCI DSS v3 12.6.1, PCI DSS v3 12.6.2 

 
Related Documents: 

 

 IT Acceptable Use Policy 

 Glossary 

 Incident Management Policy 

 
Approval 

 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 



 

Security Awareness and Training  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 06 

 

 

 
 


