
 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

1  

 

 

Summary:  Outlines the auditing, logging, and monitoring activities to be 

conducted in HIPAA covered entities 
 

Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to address the regulatory requirements for safeguarding the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of the University of Mississippi’s (UM) information assets through auditing, 
logging, and monitoring activities. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA 
hybrid policy.  

This policy applies to all workforce members, users, and all personnel affiliated with third parties who 
access or use UM information assets, regardless of physical location. 

 
IT resources include all UM owned, licensed, leased, or managed hardware and software, and use of 
the UM network via a physical or wireless connection, regardless of the ownership of the computing 
device connected to the network. 

 

This policy applies to information technology administered centrally; personally-owned computing devices 
connected by wire or wireless to the UM network; and to off-site computing devices that connect remotely 
to the UM network. 

 
Policy 

A. Audit Policy 

1. UM is committed to conducting business in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations 
and UM policies. In particular, UM is committed to compliance with the HIPAA Security Rule 
requiring security activity reviews for systems processing enterprise PHI data. 



 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

2  

 

2. UM provides notice that the employee's actions may be monitored, and that the 
employee consents to such monitoring. 

3. The planning activities for the annual audit that is required to comply with the Information 
Security Management Program Policy gives consideration to risk, involvement of technical 
and business staff, other ongoing projects, and business impacts that may impact the 
effectiveness of the audit. 

4. Whenever possible, Business Associate Agreements (BAAs) with third parties define auditing 
and logging requirements and require monitoring of access to detect unauthorized activity 
and access to UM confidential data in accordance with the Third Party Risk Management 
Policy. 

5. To ensure that appropriate safeguards are in place and effective, UM audits, logs, and 
monitors access and events to detect, report, and guard against: 

o Network vulnerabilities and intrusions 
o Performance problems and flaws in applications 
o Security violations 
o Unauthorized access to confidential data 
o Breaches in confidentiality and security of confidential data 
o Degradation or loss of information integrity (e.g., improper alteration or 

destruction of confidential data) 

B. Auditable Events 

1. UM develops and implements an Audit Event Plan to identify which systems, 
applications, and processes carry out auditing activities. 

2. The Audit Event Plan defines what types of events are subject to auditing. At a minimum, 
the following events must be audited where feasible for each user: 

o Normal system events (e.g., startup, shutdown, login attempts, errors, security 
policy changes, software installations, etc.). 



 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

3  

 

o Information changes (e.g., create, read, update, delete) including confidential 
data. 

o Unauthorized access to confidential data. 

3. The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) periodically reviews and updates the Audit 
Event Plan. This review includes consideration of events that require auditing on a 
continuous basis, and events that require auditing in response to specific situations based 
upon an assessment of risk. 

C. Content of Audit Records 

1. UM defines the content for each type of audit record in the Audit Event Plan. Audit 
record content provides sufficient detail to determine whether a given individual took a 
particular action. 

2. Audit records of information exchanges containing confidential data include the date, time, 
origin and destination of the message, but not its contents. 

3. Disclosures of confidential data are logged according to the Audit Event Plan. 

D. Audit Record Retention 

1. UM retains audit records for a minimum of 90 days to provide support for after-the-fact 
investigations of security incidents and to meet regulatory and UM’s record retention 
requirements. 

2. Audit Records are archived for a minimum of six (6) years in accordance with the Record 
Retention Policy. 

E. Audit Record Storage Capacity 

1. UM allocates sufficient audit record storage capacity to reduce the likelihood of such 
capacity being exceeded. 



 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

4  

 

2. UM configures auditing processes to reduce the likelihood of the audit record storage 
capacity being exceeded. 

F. Audit Record Generation 

1. Audit records recording user activities including access to Protected Health Information 
(PHI), exceptions, and events are generated and retained in accordance with the Record 
Retention Policy to assist in future investigations and access control monitoring. 

2. Systems provide audit record generation capability as defined in the Audit Event Plan. 

3. Where possible, systems allow system administrators to select which auditable events are 
audited by specific components of the system. 

4. Systems generate audit records that contain sufficient information to establish what events 
occurred, the sources of the events, and the outcomes of the events. Audit record content 
also provides sufficient detail to determine whether a given individual took a particular 
action associated with an event. 

5. Systems generate audit records that contain the activities of privileged users as defined in 
the Audit Event Plan. 

G. Protection of Audit Records 

1. Access to audit logging systems and system audit tools is limited to those with a job-related 
need according to the Access Control Policy to protect against possible misuse of the tools or 
compromise to the audit records. 

2. Access to audit records is limited to those with a job-related need according to the Access 
Control Policy to prevent misuse or compromise of audit records. 

3. Audit records are protected against modification and deletion according to the Access 
Control Policy to prevent unauthorized use. 



 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

5  

 

4. Audit records for external-facing technologies (e.g., wireless, firewalls, DNS, etc.) are stored 
on a server located on the internal network. 

H. Audit Monitoring, Review, Analysis and Reporting 

1. UM reviews and analyzes audit records for evidence of suspicious, unusual, and 
inappropriate activity. 

2. UM reports anomalous auditable events and related security incidents to the CISO, who is 
responsible for reporting security issues to the Leadership Team as appropriate. 

3. UM adjusts the level of audit review, analysis, and reporting within systems when there is a 
change in risk to operations, assets, individuals, and other organizations, based on law 
enforcement information, intelligence information, or other credible sources of information. 

4. UM establishes procedures for monitoring the use of systems and facilities to test the 
effectiveness of access control and security mechanisms. The results of the monitoring 
activities are reviewed on a regular basis. 

5. Monitoring activities include execution of privileged operations, authorized access, 
unauthorized access attempts, and system alerts or failures. 

6. UM meets all applicable legal requirements related to monitoring authorized access and 
unauthorized access attempts. 

7. System Administrator activities are logged and reviewed on a regular basis. 

I. Audit Reduction and Report Generation 

1. UM utilizes audit reduction, review, and reporting techniques while ensuring that 
original audit records needed to support after-the-fact investigations are not altered. 

2. Auditing and monitoring systems have the capability to automatically process audit records 
for events of interest based upon selectable event criteria. 



 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

6  

 

J. Response to Alerts 

1. Systems alert Office of Information Security (OIS) in the event of an audit processing failure 
and then OIS takes remediation action so gaps in the audit trail can be identified. 

2. Systems generate alerts for suspicious activity and security alerts. The System Administrator 
analyzes the alerts and investigate suspicious activity or suspected violations. 

3. System faults are logged and analyzed and the System Administrator takes appropriate 
remediation action. 

K. Clock Synchronization 

1. UM synchronizes system clocks with a central time server to support tracing and 
reconstitution of activity timelines. 

2. System clocks are synchronized daily and at system boot. 

3. UM restricts authorization to change system time settings to those with a job-related 
need. 

4. Changes to system clocks on critical systems are logged, monitored and reviewed. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has general responsibility for the implementation and 
enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (with Committee approval) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 



 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

7  

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 
 HIPAA Regulatory Reference: HIPAA §164.308(a)(1)(ii)(B), HIPAA §164.308(a)(1)(ii)(C), HIPAA

§164.308(a)(1)(ii)(D), HIPAA §164.308(a)(3)(ii)(A), HIPAA §164.308(a)(4)(i), HIPAA 
§164.308(a)(4)(ii)(B), HIPAA §164.308(a)(5)(ii)(C), HIPAA §164.310(a)(2)(ii), HIPAA §164.312(b), 
HIPAA §164.316(a), HIPAA §164.316(b)(1), HIPAA §164.316(b)(2)(iii) 

 HITRUST Reference: 06.i Information Systems Audit Controls, 06.j Protection of Information 
Systems Audit Tools, 09.aa Audit Logging, 09.ab Monitoring System Use, 09.ac Protection of Log 
Information, 09.ad Administrator and Operator Logs, 09.ae Fault Logging, 09.af Clock 
Synchronization

 PCI Reference: PCI DSS v3 10.1, PCI DSS v3 10.2, PCI DSS v3 10.2.1, PCI DSS v3 10.2.2, PCI DSS v3 
10.2.3, PCI DSS v3 10.2.4, PCI DSS v3 10.2.5, PCI DSS v3 10.2.6, PCI DSS v3 10.2.7, PCI DSS v3 
10.3, PCI DSS v3 10.3.1, PCI DSS v3 10.3.2, PCI DSS v3 10.3.3, PCI DSS v3 10.3.4, PCI DSS v3 
10.3.5, PCI DSS v3 10.3.6, PCI DSS v3 10.4, PCI DSS v3 10.4.1, PCI DSS v3 10.4.3, PCI DSS v3 10.5, 
PCI DSS v3 10.5.1, PCI DSS v3 10.5.2, PCI DSS v3 10.5.3, PCI DSS v3 10.5.4, PCI DSS v3 10.5.5, PCI



 

Audit Logging and Monitor Policy 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 23 

 

 

 

DSS v3 10.6, PCI DSS v3 10.6.1, PCI DSS v3 10.6.2, PCI DSS v3 10.6.3, PCI DSS v3 10.7, 
PCI DSS v3 11.5, PCI DSS v3 11.5.1, PCI DSS v3 A.1.3 

 
Related Documents: 

 Access Control Policy
 Audit Event Plan

 Business Associate Agreement Template (BAA)

 Glossary

 Information Security Management Program Policy

 Network Protection Policy

 Record Retention Policy

 Third Party Risk Management Policy

 
 

Approval 
 

 

 

 

Chief Information Security Officer <date> 
 
 
 


