
 

IT Sanction  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 25 

 

1  

 

 

Summary:  Outlines disciplinary procedures for security breaches involving PHI 

 
Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

University of Mississippi’s (UM) workforce members and third parties must comply with information 
security policies and procedures, federal regulations (e.g., HIPAA, HITECH), and state regulations 
(e.g., data breach notification laws, health codes). 

 
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that violations of information security policies, procedures, 
regulations, and standards are addressed through a disciplinary process that includes sanctions. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA 
hybrid policy.  

This policy applies to all workforce members and all personnel affiliated with third parties regardless of 
physical location. 

 
Policy 

A. Sanctions Policy 

1. UM ensures that information security policies, procedures, regulations, and standards are 
followed and that appropriate sanctions are taken against workforce members and third 
parties who violate them. 

B. Disciplinary Process 

1. UM develops and employs a formal disciplinary process for workforce members who fail to 
comply with policies, federal regulations (e.g., HIPAA, HITECH), and state regulations (e.g., 
data breach notification laws, health codes). 



 

IT Sanction  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 25 

 

2  

 

2. The formal disciplinary process commences after verification that a security incident has 
occurred. 

3. The formal disciplinary process ensures correct and fair treatment for workforce members 
who are suspected of committing security incidents. 

4. Potential sanctions resulting from the disciplinary process include but are not limited to: 

 Remedial training 
 Informal counseling 
 Formal counseling 
 Suspension or removal of access rights to the UM’s information assets 
 Performance evaluation impacts and documentation 
 Suspension or rescinding of promotion 
 License, registration, or certification denial or revocation 
 Transfer from current job position 
 Termination of employment and/or relationship with UM. 

5. UM appoints Human Resources to handle security incidents involving workforce 
members. 

6. UM maintains a list of workforce members involved in security incidents including the 
outcome of the investigation. 

7. In cases where civil or criminal charges are involved, the CISO works together with Human 
Resources and Legal Counsel to determine and take appropriate legal action. 

8. Third parties that fail to comply are sanctioned according to the Third Party Risk 
Management Policy. 

9. UM provides for disciplinary actions to be taken against UM employees who violate the 
provisions of the Compliance Plan. The following list of employee infractions and 
violations apply to the UM Compliance Program. These are supplemental to existing 
employee disciplinary guidelines. 



 

IT Sanction  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 25 

 

3  

 



 

IT Sanction  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 25 

 

4  

 

Employee Action Disciplinary Action 

Employees willfully providing materially false 
information to UM, or a government agency, 
patient, insurer, or the like. 

 
Employees willfully disclosing Protected 
Health Information (PHI) to unauthorized 
individuals or entities. 

 
Employees intentionally misusing the 
Compliance Hotline or other reporting 
mechanism by knowingly and willfully 
providing false information to the Office of 
Integrity and Compliance or the Compliance 
Committee. 

Disciplinary action shall be termination of 
employment. 

Employees willfully viewing Protected Health 
Information for reasons other than 
treatment, payment, health care operations, 
approved Research or those required by law. 

First Offense: Disciplinary Action shall range 
from 10 consecutive working days or 80 
consecutive working hours without pay up to 
and including termination. 

Second Offense: Termination 

Employees negligently providing incorrect 
information to UM, or a government 
agency, patient, insurer, or the like. 

 

Employees violating any relevant State or 
Federal Law, Rule, or Regulation. 

Disciplinary Action shall range from 
counseling up to and including termination. 
Egregious situations may result in suspension 
pending termination. 



 

IT Sanction  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 25 

 

5  

 

 
 

10. In the event that periodic audits reveal any noncompliant behavior or improper or mistaken 
billing incidents, all mistaken payments shall be returned to the appropriate payer(s) and a 
report shall be made to the appropriate subcommittee. Depending on the nature and 
severity of the conduct revealed through the audit procedure, the disciplinary action as 

Employees failing to report another 
employee's violations of duty pursuant to this 
Compliance Plan. 

 

Employees failing to detect and/or report 
conduct by an employee that a reasonable 
person should know is criminal and could 
reasonably be expected to be detected. 

 

Employees failing to take action as prescribed 
under this Compliance Plan or to comply with 
duties expressed or implied as set forth in 
this Compliance Plan. 

 

Employees engaging in any conduct 
prohibited by the terms of this Compliance 
Plan. 

 

Employees unintentionally or carelessly 
revealing patient information to oneself or 
others for reasons other than treatment, 
payment, health care operations, approved 
research or those required by law. 

Subsequent or repeat violation shall result in 
a progressive application of disciplinary 
sanctions. 



 

IT Sanction  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 25 

 

6  

 

listed above may be instituted. Appropriate reports mandated by Federal or State law shall 
be made as required. 

 

 
11. Certain factors as listed below may be considered as mitigation in any proposed disciplinary 

action: (a) whether the employee promptly reported his/her own violation, (b) whether the 
report constitutes UM's first awareness of the violation and the employee's involvement, 
and (c) whether the employee cooperated fully in investigating and/or correcting the 
violation. 

12. Any employee disciplinary action resulting from a violation of this Compliance Plan should 
be coordinated through the Office of Integrity and Compliance and the Department of 
Human Resources. Any such disciplinary action must be reviewed by the Compliance 
Committee to determine if the Compliance Program needs to be revised. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has general responsibility for the implementation and 
enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approval by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 



 

IT Sanction  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 25 

 

 

 

appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in 
accordance with policy.. 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for 
appropriateness by the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 

 HIPAA Regulatory References: HIPAA §164.308(a)(1)(ii)(C), HIPAA §164.414(a), HIPAA
§164.530(e) 

 HITRUST Reference: 02.f Disciplinary Process

 
Related Documents: 

 Glossary

 Third Party Risk Management Policy

 
Approval 

 

 

 

 

Chief Information Security Officer <date> 
 
 


