
 
Mobile Computing Device Security 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 20 
 

1  

 
 

Summary:  Protecting PHI on mobile devices 
 
Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 
 
Purpose of Policy 
The purpose of this policy is to establish security measures for the University of 
Mississippi (UM) that protect against the risks of using mobile computing devices. 

 
Definitions 
For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 
This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi 
(UM) HIPAA hybrid policy. 
This policy applies to all mobile computing devices that connect to UM’s network and 
access confidential data. 

 
All workforce members and users utilizing mobile computing devices connecting to UM’s 
network and accessing confidential data assume the responsibility for the security of 
information contained within. 

 
Policy 

A. Mobile Computing Device Policy 
1. UM manages and controls use of mobile computing devices, and appropriate 

security measures are adopted to protect against the risks of using mobile 
computing devices. 

2. Usage of mobile computing devices must comply with all international, federal and 
state laws, and UM policies. Unauthorized disclosure of confidential data may 
violate federal and/or state laws, and/or ethical standards, and may cause injury. 

3. Unauthorized disclosure may result in disciplinary and/or legal actions being taken, 
including but not limited to termination of privileges and/or employment in 
accordance with the Sanctions Policy. 



 
Mobile Computing Device Security 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 20 
 

2  

 
B. Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) Mobile Computing Device Policy 

1. Mobile computing devices that are personally owned by workforce members 
are the responsibility of the owner of that device. 

2. The owner of any personally-owned mobile computing device connected to UM’s 
information assets (e.g., network, email system, website, etc.) are fully responsible 
for the behavior of all users on the mobile computing device, and for all data and 
network traffic accessed or transmitted to and from the mobile computing device, 
regardless of whether the owner is aware of the data and network traffic. 

3. Personally-owned mobile computing devices may connect to UM’s network and 
access confidential data in accordance with this policy and associated procedures. 

4. Personally-owned mobile computing devices may be subject to additional 
restrictions or security measures as determined by the Chief Information Security 
Officer (CISO). 

C. Business Mobile Computing Device Policy 
1. Mobile computing devices issued by UM for business purposes remain the 

property of UM. 
2. When the business mobile computing device is allocated, the user assumes 

responsibility for physical security of the device and any UM data contained within. 
3. Prior to no longer being employed by UM, the user returns the mobile device 

in accordance with the Termination Policy. 
4. All business mobile computing devices must be disposed of in accordance with the 

Secure Disposal Policy after they reach end of life. 
D. Acceptable Use Policy 

1. The Information Technology Acceptable Use Policy applies to all mobile computing 
devices regardless of ownership. 



 
Mobile Computing Device Security 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 20 
 

3  

 
2. Users are responsible for ensuring mobile computing device applications and 

multimedia capabilities are not used to breach privacy and confidentiality according 
to the Information Technology Acceptable Use Policy. 

3. Users must agree to take responsibility for the security of their mobile computing 
device and UM data contained therein. 

4. Users have no expectation of privacy associated with any of UM data they store in 
or send through mobile computing devices. 

5. Users are not permitted to bypass, or attempt to bypass, security protections on 
mobile computing devices connected to UM’s network or communication 
systems. 

6. Users are responsible for ensuring that confidential data is only transmitted 
using approved/secure communication functions including UM email. 

7. Users of mobile computing devices connected to UM’s email must ensure that UM 
data is erased when the device is no longer being used for UM business. 

E. Physical Protection Policy 
1. Any mobile computing device containing confidential data is not left unattended in 

public areas (e.g., vehicles, hotel rooms, conference rooms, airports, etc.), even for a 
short period of time, without being physically protected. 

2. All mobile computing devices containing confidential data are carried as hand 
luggage when traveling and never checked as baggage nor stored anywhere 
prohibiting immediate access or visual contact with the device. 

3. In the event that a mobile computing device containing confidential data is lost or 
stolen, the incident must be reported according to the Incident Management Policy. 

4. UM implements procedures that take into account legal, insurance, and other 
security requirements for cases of theft or loss of mobile computing devices 
containing confidential data. 



 
Mobile Computing Device Security 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 20 
 

4  

 
F. Public Places 

1. Physical protection is in place when using mobile computing devices in public 
places, meeting rooms and other unprotected areas outside of UM premises to 
avoid the unauthorized access to or disclosure of confidential information. 

2. Users of mobile computing devices containing confidential data take care to 
avoid the unintentional disclosure of confidential information to unauthorized 
persons in public places. 

G. Access Controls 
1. All mobile computing devices require authentication (e.g., password, pin number, 

biometric, etc.). All mobile computing devices must enter authentication credentials 
prior to accessing the UM guest network. 

2. All mobile computing devices automatically time out after no more than five 
minutes of inactivity according to the Access Control Policy. If locked, the 
device require re- authentication to unlock. 

H. Encryption 
1. All mobile devices are encrypted according to the Encryption Policy. 
2. If encryption is not reasonable and appropriate, UM documents the acceptance of risk. 

I. Endpoint Protection Policy 
1. All users are responsible for ensuring mobile computing devices are compliant with the 

Endpoint Protection Policy. 
2. All users are responsible for ensuring Operating System updates and security 

patches for mobile computing devices are kept up-to-date. 



 
Mobile Computing Device Security 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 20 
 

5  

 
J. Network Connections 

1. UM only authorizes connections of mobile computing devices to UM’s network if 
the devices meet the requirements of this policy. 

2. Mobile computing devices that remotely access UM’s network comply with the 
Remote Access Policy. 

3. If UM has reason to believe that a mobile computing device connected to UM’s 
network is using information asset resources inappropriately, or is acting in violation 
of federal and state laws or regulations, network traffic to and from that mobile 
computing device may be monitored. If justified, the mobile computing device is 
disconnected from UM’s network, and appropriate actions are taken in accordance 
with the Sanctions Policy and federal and state law and regulations. 

K. Security Awareness Training 
1. Training is provided for workforce members using mobile computing devices 

according to the Security Awareness and Training Policy in order to raise 
awareness on the additional risks resulting from this way of working and the 
mobile device controls that are implemented. 



 
Mobile Computing Device Security 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 20 
 

6  

 
Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 
The CISO, or designee, has general responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of this 
policy. 

 
Future Revisions 
UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approval by 
committee) at any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 
Sanctions 
Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s 
computing environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary 
actions deemed appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil 
prosecution in accordance with policy. 

 
Exceptions 
Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the 
Information Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed 
periodically for appropriateness by the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without 
notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 
The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 
 HIPAA Regulatory Reference: HIPAA § 164.310 (b) 
 HITRUST Reference: 01.x Mobile Computing and Communications 
 PCI Reference: PCI DSS v3 1.4 

 
Related Documents: 



 
Mobile Computing Device Security 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 20 
 

 

 
 

 Information Technology Acceptable Use Policy 
 Access Control Policy 
 Encryption Policy 
 Endpoint Protection Policy 
 Glossary 
 Incident Management Policy 
 Remote Access Policy 
 Sanctions Policy 
 Secure Disposal Policy 
 Security Awareness and Training Policy 
 Termination Policy 

 
Approval 

 
 
 
 

Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 
 
 


	Purpose of Policy
	Definitions
	Scope
	Policy
	Policy Compliance
	Future Revisions
	Sanctions
	Exceptions
	Regulatory and Standards References
	Approval

