
 

Configuration Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 14 

 

1  

 

 

Summary:  Minimizing risk to PHI in HIPAA covered entities by managing the 

configuration of information assets 
 

Affected Individuals: Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to minimize risk to University of Mississippi (UM) and to ensure the 
operational effectiveness and continuity of the Information Technology (IT) environment by managing 
the configuration of information assets. 

 
Configuration management controls and processes ensure that changes to UM’s information assets are 
effective and efficient, reduce security risks, are fully documented, and that these changes occur with 
minimal disruption to operations. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA 
hybrid policy. This policy applies to all UM information assets, e.g., hardware, software, IT 
infrastructure (e.g., equipment, networks, and operating systems), services, and associated 
documentation regardless of origin, nature, or location (e.g., contractor, in-house, development, 
operations, all hosting data centers, internal and external systems) unless otherwise specified. 

 
Policy 

A. Configuration Management Plan 

1. UM develops, implements, tests, and maintains a Configuration Management Plan that 
minimizes risk through planning, communication, and collaboration and that ensures 
changes to the IT Infrastructure and production environment are effective and efficient with 
minimal disruption to UM. 

2. The Configuration Management Plan includes, at a minimum: 



 

Configuration Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 14 

 

2  

 

 Roles and responsibilities. 
 Configuration management processes and procedures. 
 A definition of the items in the IT Infrastructure that must be placed under 

configuration management. 
 Processes for putting IT acquisition and development (pre-production) items under 

configuration management. 
 Processes for managing, testing, documenting, deciding upon, and communicating 

status of the configuration of the items that are subject to configuration management. 

B. Security of System Configuration Documentation 

1. System configuration documentation is treated as confidential data with minimum 
necessary and need-to-know access, and is protected against unauthorized access in 
accordance with the Access Control Policy. 

2. Access to system configuration documentation is authorized by the Chief Information 
Security Officer (CISO). 

C. Baseline Configurations 

1. UM develops, documents, controls, and maintains current baseline configurations for all 
managed information systems. 

2. UM reviews and updates the baseline configurations of the managed information 
systems at least annually. 

3. UM retains older versions of baseline configurations as deemed necessary to support 
continuity of operations (e.g., rollback of a system update). 

D. Configuration Settings 

1. UM establishes and documents mandatory configuration settings for IT infrastructure 
items using a security configuration checklist that reflects the most restrictive mode 
consistent with operational requirements. 



 

Configuration Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 14 

 

3  

 

2. Only authorized administrators are allowed to implement approved upgrades to software, 
applications and program libraries based on business requirements and the security 
implications of the release. 

3. Applications and operating systems are successfully tested for usability, security and impact 
prior to production. 

4. UM identifies and documents exceptions from the mandatory configuration settings for 
individual components within information systems based on explicit operational 
requirements. Exceptions are approved by the CISO. 

5. UM uses its configuration control program to maintain control of all implemented 
software and system documentation and archives prior versions of implemented software 
and system documentation. 

6. UM incorporates detection of unauthorized, security-relevant configuration changes into 
the Incident Response Plan to ensure that such detected events are tracked, monitored, 
corrected, and available for historical purposes in accordance with the Incident 
Management Policy. 

E. Configuration Change Control 

1. The implementation of changes, including patches, service packs, and other updates and 
modifications, is controlled by the Change Management Policy. 

2. UM audits activities associated with configuration-controlled changes to information 
systems. 

F. Least Functionality 

1. UM configures information systems to provide only essential capabilities and specifically 
prohibits or restricts the use of non-essential functions, ports, protocols, and/or services in 
order to reduce risk. 



 

Configuration Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 14 

 

4  

 

2. UM reviews information systems at least annually to identify and eliminate unnecessary 
functions, ports, protocols, and/or services. 

G. IT Infrastructure Inventory 

1. UM develops, documents, and maintains an inventory of IT Infrastructure items. 
Inventory detail must be maintained at a sufficient level for purposes of tracking and 
reporting. 

2. UM continuously updates the IT Infrastructure inventory as an integral part of 
installations, removals, and information system updates. 

3. UM verifies that all components within the authorization boundary of the information 
system are either inventoried as a part of the system or recognized by another system as a 
component within that system. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The CISO, or designee, has general responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approved by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 



 

Configuration Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 14 

 

 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for 
appropriateness by the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 HITRUST References: 09.r Security of System Documentation, 10.k Change Control Procedures 

 PCI References: PCI DSS v3 6.4 

 
Related Documents: 

 Information Technology Access Control Policy 

 Change Management Policy 

 Configuration Management Plan 

 Glossary 

 Incident Management Policy 

 Incident Response Plan 

 Minimum Security Baseline Requirements 
 Security Configuration Checklist 

 
Approval 

 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 

 
 


