
 
Media Protection 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 19 
 

1  

 
 

Summary:  Protecting PHI recorded on removable media in HIPAA covered 
entities 
 
Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 
 
Purpose of Policy 
The purpose of this policy is to protect all University of Mississippi’s (UM) media containing confidential 
data in digital format, to ensure destruction before disposal, and to ensure compliance with federal and 
state laws and regulations concerning the security and privacy of confidential data copied onto removable 
media. 

 
Definitions 
For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 
This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA 
hybrid policy. 

This policy applies to all media and removable media containing UM’s data regardless of physical 
location. 

 
Policy 

A. Media Protection Policy 

1. UM physically and logically protects media containing confidential data while at rest, 
stored, or actively being accessed. 

2. UM develops and implements media protection processes and procedures. 

B. Data Exchange Policy and Procedures 

1. UM disposes of all UM confidential data in any format including media and paper media 
according to the Secure Disposal Policy. 

2. UM restricts access of media and paper media containing confidential data according to 
the Access Control Policy. 



 
Media Protection 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 19 
 

2  

 

C. Management of Removable Media 

1. UM develops and implements processes and procedures for the management of 
removable media. 

2. UM restricts the types and use of removable media to maintain security of confidential 
data. 

3. UM requires the registration of removable media before use. 

4. Removable media is encrypted in accordance with the Encryption Policy. 

5. Removable media is handled, labeled and stored in accordance with the Data Classification 
and Handling Policy in addition to this policy. 

D. Media Transport and Storage 

1. UM physically controls and securely stores media within a controlled area such as a 
locked drawer or room. 

2. UM protects and controls all media during transport outside of controlled areas to 
prevent unauthorized access or use. 

3. UM maintains accountability for all media during transport outside of controlled areas. 

4. UM restricts the transport of media outside of controlled areas to authorized personnel. 

5. All media backups must be encrypted according to the Information Backup and Storage 
Policy. 

6. UM protects the confidentiality and integrity of media during transport outside of 
controlled areas according to the Encryption Policy. 

7. If a third party is responsible for transporting backup media offsite, they are responsible for 
maintaining security according to the Third Party Risk Management Policy. 

 

E. Secure Disposal of Media 

1. Media and paper media is disposed of securely and safely when no longer needed according 
to the Secure Disposal Policy. 

2. UM maintains a log and an audit trail of media and paper media disposal activities 
according to the Secure Disposal Policy. 

 

F. Approval of Encrypted Portable Media 
 
USB drives and other types of removable disks appointed by the Covered Entity (CE) to store or 
transport PHI and/or for use with HIPAA systems must be individually approved by IT prior to use.  
The device owner or their manager should follow the process below for approval. 
 
https://itsecurity.olemiss.edu/media-protection 
 

 



 
Media Protection 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 19 
 

3  

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 
The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), or designee, has general responsibility for the 
implementation and enforcement of this policy. 

 
Future Revisions 
UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approval by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 
Sanctions 
Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 

 
Exceptions 
Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 



 
Media Protection 

HIPAA Policy:  Security 19 
 

 

 

Regulatory and Standards References 
The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 
• HIPAA Regulatory References: HIPAA §164.310(c), HIPAA §164.310(d)(1), HIPAA 

§164.310(d)(2)(i), HIPAA §164.310(d)(2)(ii), HIPAA §164.310(d)(2)(iii), HIPAA 
§164.310(d)(2)(iv), HIPAA §164.312(c)(1) 

 HITRUST References: 09.o Management of Removable Media, 09.p Disposal of 
Media, 09.s Information Exchange Policies and Procedures 

 PCI References: PCI DSS v1.2 9.8, PCI DSS v3 9.8 
 

Related Documents: 
 

 Information Technology Access Control Policy 
 Data Classification and Handling Policy 
 Encryption Policy 
 Glossary 
 Secure Disposal Policy 
 Third Party Risk Management Policy 

 
Approval 

 
 
 
 

Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 
 
 


	Purpose of Policy
	Definitions
	Scope
	Policy
	Policy Compliance Enforcement
	Future Revisions
	Sanctions
	Exceptions
	Regulatory and Standards References
	Approval

