
 The University of Mississippi  

Page 1 of 4 
 

Student Disability Services 

TEMPORARY INJURIES AND ILLNESSES POLICY 

Temporary injuries and illnesses are not covered as disabilities under the Americans with Disabilities Act or 
under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act.  The University recognizes, however, that such injuries/illnesses 
can occur during the school year and may adversely affect a student’s ability to fully participate in classes.   

Because temporary injuries and illnesses are not considered to be disabilities, they generally do not quality for 
accommodations.  A temporary injury or illness is a short-term impairment in functioning.  Students with 
temporary injuries or illnesses are not expected to register with Student Disability Services (SDS).  

There may be exceptions to the above depending on the severity and duration of the injury or illness.  
Generally, injuries or illnesses with serious, longer-term consequences or extensive recovery periods may be 
considered to be temporary disabilities rather than temporary injuries.  Students with temporary disabilities 
may qualify for accommodations through SDS.  Typically, to qualify for a temporary disability, recovery time 
will last four months or longer. 

Temporary Injury/Illness examples 
may include but are not limited to: 

Temporary Disability examples 
may include but are not limited to: 

Permanent Disability examples 
may include but are not limited to: 

Broken arm, wrist, finger, leg Surgical Bone Fracture Repair Paraplegia/Quadriplegia 

Flu/Pneumonia Cancer Treatment Post-Chemo Syndrome 

Simple Concussion Repeated Concussions Traumatic Brain Injury 

Food Poisoning Lyme's Disease Sickle Cell Anemia 

Appendicitis Open Heart Surgery Organ Replacement 

Simple Test Anxiety Depression Bipolar Disorder 

Students with temporary injuries and illnesses are encouraged to work directly with faculty because faculty are 
uniquely situated to provide assistance to students with temporary injuries and illnesses.  Students must be 
proactive. Timely, frequent, and open communication with faculty is essential to ensuring that needs are met.  
Faculty may request the student provide a letter certified from a health care provider detailing the 
diagnosis/injury, the impact, and the length of time assistance may be needed. Retroactive assistance is rarely, 
if ever, approved; however, it is at the faculty member’s discretion to do so. Faculty have the authority to 
make accommodations based on evidence provided by the student. If the faculty decides not to provide an 
accommodation that the students deems is necessary, the student may appeal to the department chair or 
program director (or dean, when the faculty is chair or program director) and then to the Dean. 

Attendance 

The University has policies in place regarding attendance and allows faculty discretion to set attendance rules 
in their classes. Students should talk with instructors immediately if there are absences resulting from an 
injury or illness.  In situations where students are unable to communicate with faculty because of an injury or 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 2 of 4 
 

illness, the student’s family should immediately contact the Office of Leadership and Advocacy regarding 
absences related to the injury or illness.  That office can be reached by calling 662-915-7248. 

Depending on the severity of the injury/illness and the number of absences a student may have, the student 
may choose to explore a withdrawal from classes.  Students are encouraged to speak with instructors about 
this option.  Students considering this option should also contact the Registrar’s office 662-915-7792 for 
information.   

Class Notes 

If an injury impacts the ability to take notes, students are encouraged to explore the following options: 

• Ask another student in the class to share notes.  Notes can be shared via email or the use of a copier.  
Public copiers are available in the library for student use.  Students with temporary injuries may also 
request to use the SDS copier to copy notes for the duration of the injury. 

• Discuss with instructors the possibility of audio recording lectures or using a laptop for notetaking. 

Written/Typed Assignments and Homework 

Students should ask a friend or family member to hand-write or type assignments.  If no one can provide that 
assistance, it may be necessary to hire someone to perform these tasks.   

Students may also use voice-to-text software or phone apps.  Free versions of this software are available.  
Students can also purchase this software if necessary. 

Exams and Other Course Evaluations 

It can be particularly difficult for students with temporary injuries, especially hand injuries, to take exams, 
tests, or quizzes.  Below are some suggestions that students should discuss with instructors: 

• Answering questions on the test paper instead of using a Scantron; 

• Using a scribe provided by the instructor; 

• Having additional time to complete tests; 

• Using a laptop for tests instead of hand-writing answers 

• Answering test questions orally. 

Physical Access to Buildings 

If a student has a temporary injury that impacts the ability to walk unassisted, SDS may be able to re-locate a 
class that is located in one of the few buildings on campus that does not have an elevator, to a classroom in a 
fully accessible building. 

If a temporary injury creates the same limitation in a campus residence hall, students should speak to a 
Housing staff member about options that may be available. 

 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 3 of 4 
 

 

Transportation 

The University does not have an internal transportation system and does not provide personal transportation 
for students with permanent disabilities or temporary injuries.  There are several options available to students 
who may have difficulty walking. 

• Friends or family members can drive the student where she or he needs to go. 

• Temporary handicap parking may be used with appropriate documentation.  The University’s 
Department of Parking and Transportation can provide students with the process for requesting this 
assistance.  Their telephone number is 662-915-7235 and website address is 
http://www.olemiss.edu/parking/ADA.html 

• The Oxford University Transit System (OUT) has fully accessible buses that service most of Oxford and 
campus.  Use of the buses is free for students who show a valid campus ID.  The Oxford/University bus 
schedules and routes can be accessed on the City of Oxford’s website at 
http://www.oxfordms.net/visitors/oxford-university-transit. 

• There are a number of taxi cab companies in Oxford.  The Oxford Visitors Center keeps a list of cab 
companies on their website at http://visitoxfordms.com/about-oxford/directions-transportation/. 

• Students may also contact local medical supply companies about the possibility of renting medical 
scooters, wheelchairs, or other mobility devices. 

Personal Assistance 

The University is not legally required to provide assistance of a personal nature.  Personal assistance includes, 
but is not limited to, assistance carrying books, scribing or typing, personal attendants, medical equipment 
such as crutches or wheelchairs, or transportation.  

Applying for Temporary Accommodations through SDS 

Students who have temporary disabilities, the recovery of which may take four (4) months or longer, should 
reach out to SDS to explore available options for accommodations.   

Every effort is made by SDS to process requests in a timely and efficient manner. Please be aware, however, 
that the approval process for ADA accommodations through SDS can take two or more weeks, depending on 
how quickly the student provides required documentation and the SDS active caseload.  Because of this, 
students with temporary disabilities are strongly encouraged to work directly with faculty regarding their 
needs in the classroom while moving through the SDS approval process. 

The process for requesting accommodations through SDS is as follows: 

1. Submit a completed and signed intake application to SDS; 
2. Complete an initial interview with an SDS staff member;  
3. Submit medical documentation that meets the same standards as that required for permanent 

disabilities (documentation guidelines available on the SDS website at sds.olemiss.edu.  In addition to 



 The University of Mississippi  

Page 4 of 4 
 

documentation that meets the published guidelines, documentation of temporary disabilities must 
also include a specific date when assistance is no longer necessary.   

Again, this process may be time consuming, so students are encouraged to explore other options for 
assistance that may be available. 

Please do not hesitate to contact Student Disability Services with any questions or concerns: 

Location:  234 Martindale 
Telephone Number: 662-915-7128 
Email Address:  sds@olemiss.edu 

 


