
 
Risk Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 02 
 
 

1  

 

 

Summary:  Develops a risk management plan for HIPAA entities 

 
Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to develop and implement a Risk Management Plan and Program that 
addresses risk assessments, risk mitigation, and risk evaluation for the University of Mississippi (UM). 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA hybrid 
policy.  

All users and workforce members, including third parties, who may have access or exposure to UM’s 
data are required to comply with this policy. 

 
Policy 

A. Risk Management Plan Development 

1. UM develops and implements a formal, comprehensive Risk Management Plan to 
manage risk associated with the operation and use of information systems, including 
physical and environmental hazards, to an acceptable level. 

2. Information safeguards are not applied unnecessarily (e.g., to de-identified information). 

B. Risk Assessments 

1. UM performs risk assessments that address all major HITRUST CSF (Common Security 
Framework) domains to identify and quantify risks. 

2. UM performs risk assessments in a consistent way and identifies information security risks 
to UM. This includes the evaluation of multiple factors that may impact security as 



 
Risk Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 02 
 
 

2  

 

well as the likelihood and impact from a loss of confidentiality, integrity and availability of 
information and systems. 

3. UM accounts for risks from prior incidents, changes in the environment, and third 
parties. 

4. Formal risk assessments are performed at planned intervals, or when major changes occur 
in the environment, and the results reviewed annually. 

C. Risk Mitigation 

1. UM reduces risk to the lowest acceptable level. 

2. UM defines and documents the criteria to determine whether or not a risk is avoided, 
accepted, transferred or treated in the Corrective Action Plan. 

3. UM implements a process for ensuring that corrective action plans are prioritized and 
maintained; and the remedial information security actions necessary to mitigate risk to 
operations and assets, individuals, and other organizations are documented. 

4. UM reviews corrective action plans (plans of action and milestones) for consistency with the 
risk management strategy and UM-wide priorities for risk response actions. 

5. UM updates existing remediation or corrective action plans monthly based on the 
findings from security controls assessments, security impact analyses, and continuous 
monitoring activities. 

D. Risk Evaluation 

1. UM continually evaluates and assesses risks. 

2. Risk assessments are re-evaluated at least annually, or when there are significant changes in 
the environment. 



 
Risk Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 02 
 
 

3  

 
 

 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), or designee has general responsibility for the 
implementation and enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (with committee approval) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 



 
Risk Management  

HIPAA Policy:  Security 02 
 
 

4  

 

 HIPAA Regulatory References: HIPAA § 164.308 (a)(1)(i), HIPAA § 164.308 (a)(1)(ii)(A), 
HIPAA § 164.308 (a)(1)(ii)(B), HIPAA § 164.308 (a)(2), HIPAA § 164.308 (a)(7)(ii)(E), HIPAA 
§ 164.316(a), HIPAA § 164.402 

 HITRUST References: 03.a Risk Management Program Development, 03.b 
Performing Risk Assessments, 03.c Risk Mitigation, 03.d Risk Evaluation 

 PCI References: PCI DSS v3 12.2 

 
Related Documents: 

 Data Classification and Handling Policy 

 Glossary 

 Corrective Action Plan 

 
Approval 

 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 

 


