
 

Encryption 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 18 

 

1  

 

 

Summary:  Using encryption to protect PHI in HIPAA covered entities 

 
Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to establish the methods for protecting the confidentiality, authenticity and 
integrity of University of Mississippi’s (UM) data at rest, in transit, and in storage by cryptographic 
methods, and to ensure that encryption standards meet national and international regulations and 
industry standards. 

 

The intent of this policy is to provide guidance regarding the use of encryption to protect confidential data. 
Mobile computing devices, removable media, and confidential data in storage and transmission must be 
encrypted to protect against unauthorized access, loss, or alteration. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA 
hybrid policy. All workforce members and users, including third parties, who have access or 
exposure to UM’s confidential data are required to comply with this policy. 

 
1. Policy 

A. Regulation of Encryption 

1. Cryptographic controls are used in compliance with all relevant agreements, laws, and 
regulatory requirements. 

2. Compliance with all relevant regulations is reviewed on an annual basis. 



 

Encryption 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 18 

 

2  

 

B. Policy on the Use of Encryption 

1. This policy is supported by formal procedures on the use of cryptographic controls for 
protection of confidential data. 

2. All encryption mechanisms must be approved by the Chief Information Security Officer 
(CISO). 

3. All encryption mechanisms implemented to comply with this policy must support a 
minimum of 128-bit AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) encryption, or equivalent. 

4. Encryption based on pre-determined criteria protects confidential data on mobile 
computing devices, on removable media, and across communication paths. 

5. Any “write” operation (e.g., file copy) of confidential data to any removable media 
connected to UM computing devices must employ an approved encryption mechanism to 
protect against unauthorized access to or modification of the data. 

6. When transmitting confidential data using removable media the sending party must: 

 Use an encryption mechanism to protect against unauthorized access or modification. 
 Authenticate the requesting person or entity. 
 Send the minimum amount of confidential data required by the receiving person or 

entity. 

7. If un-encrypted confidential data is discovered on removable media, the confidential data is 
transferred either to an UM-managed computing device or to an approved, encrypted 
removable media format. 

8. If un-encrypted media has been used for confidential data storage, the unencrypted media 
must be turned in to the CISO (or designee) for proper disposal as soon as the data has been 
transferred to an approved, encrypted media and format. 

9. Encryption keys and/or passwords are not printed nor allowed to directly accompany 
removable media. They must be kept physically and electronically separate. 



 

Encryption 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 18 

 

3  

 

10. All communications of encryption keys and/or passwords must take place via a secure 
method (e.g., telephone, secure email, etc.). 

C. Encryption Key Management 

1. Encryption key management is implemented based on specific roles and responsibilities and 
in consideration of regulatory requirements, restrictions and issues. 

2. Encryption keys and the equipment to generate, store and archive keys is logically and 
physically protected against modification, loss, destruction and disclosure. 

3. A formal key management system is defined and implemented consistent with federal and 
industry-recognized guidelines to securely manage keys issued by trusted Certificate 
Authorities. 

4. Access to encryption keys is limited to designated UM employees and not revealed to 
consultants, contractors, vendors, or other third parties. 

5. Where feasible, encryption keys are generated and maintained in such a way that no single 
person has full knowledge of any single encryption key. 

6. Where feasible, encryption keys are encrypted in storage using a key vault solution. 

7. Encryption keys are limited to a period of time not to exceed one year. This may be waived 
by the CISO in accordance with the Information Security Waiver Policy. 



 

Encryption 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 18 

 

4  

 

D. Data Protection 

1. The confidentiality and integrity of covered information at rest is protected using an 
encryption method appropriate to the medium anywhere it is stored, or documentation is 
maintained. 

2. In instances where covered information is not encrypted, a documented rationale for not 
doing so must be provided. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The CISO or designee has general responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approval by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 



 

Encryption 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 18 

 

 

 

Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 

 HIPAA Regulatory References: HIPAA § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(D), HIPAA § 164.312(a)(2)(iv), 
HIPAA § 164.312(e)(2)(ii)

 HITRUST References: 06.f Regulation of Cryptographic Controls, 10.f Policy on the 
Use of Cryptographic Controls, 10.g Key Management

 PCI References: PCI DSS v3 3.5, PCI DSS v3 3.5.1, PCI DSS v3 3.5.2, PCI DSS v3 3.6, PCI DSS 
v3 3.6.1, PCI DSS v3 3.6.2, PCI DSS v3 3.6.3, PCI DSS v3 3.6.4, PCI DSS v3 3.6.5, PCI DSS v3 
3.6.6, PCI DSS v3 3.6.7, PCI DSS v3 3.6.8, PCI DSS v3 8.2.2

 
Related Documents: 

 
 Glossary

 Information Exchange Policy

 Media Protection Policy
 Mobile Computing Device Security Policy

 
Approval 

 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 

 
 


