
 

Clear Desk and Clear Screen 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 09 

 

1  

 
 

Summary:  Steps to protect PHI on desk tops and computer screens from 

disclosure 

 
Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to ensure confidential data is kept private and protected from unauthorized 
access and viewing. The goal is to reduce the risks of unauthorized access to, or loss of, or damage to, 
the University of Mississippi’s (UM) enterprise data. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA hybrid 
policy. 

This policy applies to all UM confidential data, computing devices, and users. 

 
1. Policy 

A. Clear Desk and Clear Screen Policy 

1. Confidential data on removable media is not left unattended and unsecured. 

2. Confidential data on removable media is protected from access by unauthorized 
individuals when not in use according to the Encryption Policy. 

3. Reproduction technology (e.g., printers, copiers, scanners, cameras, facsimile machines, 
etc.) is protected physically from use by unauthorized individuals to prevent unauthorized 
reproduction of confidential data. 

4. Passwords are not posted on, under, or near a computer or other computing 
devices. 



 

Clear Desk and Clear Screen 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 09 

 

2  

 

B. Workstation Security 

1. All users close all applications, logout, or lock their computer when they are away from 
their desk to protect confidential data from unauthorized access and viewing. 

2. Workstations are configured to automatically lock the screen in accordance with the 
Access Control Policy. 

3. Workstations require a password to deactivate the screen saver. 

C. Mail Services 

1. Covered or critical information is protected when using internal or external (e.g., USPS) 
mail services. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has general responsibility for the implementation and 
enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approval by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 



 

Clear Desk and Clear Screen 
HIPAA Policy:  Security 09 

 

 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for 
appropriateness by the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 

 HIPAA Regulatory Reference: HIPAA § 164.310(b), HIPAA § 164.312(a)(2)(i) 

 HITRUST Reference: 01.h Clear Desk and Clear Screen Policy 
 

Related Documents: 

 Access Control Policy 

 Data Classification and Storage Policy 

 Encryption Policy 

 Information Technology Acceptable Use Policy 
 Glossary 

 
Approval 

 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 

 
 


