
 

Vulnerability Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 22 

 

1  

 

 

Summary: Outlines procedures for identifying and mitigating risks from 

vulnerabilities in HIPAA covered entities 
 

Affected Individuals: Employees in HIPAA covered entities; IT staff 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to state the actions University of Mississippi (UM) takes to manage risk 
related to technical vulnerabilities in an effective, systematic, and repeatable way, and to confirm the 
effectiveness of those actions. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA 
hybrid policy. 

This policy applies to all information assets connected to UM’s network including, but not limited to, 
computer workstations, laptops, tablets, smartphones, servers, network switches and routers, etc. 
The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has the authority to conduct vulnerability assessments on 
any information asset, product, or service within UM. 

 
Policy 

A. Control of Technical Vulnerabilities 

1. UM takes deliberate actions to reduce and mitigate risks to UM’s systems 
resulting from exploitation of technical vulnerabilities. 

2. UM obtains timely information about technical vulnerabilities, evaluates the exposure to 
such vulnerabilities, and takes appropriate measures to address the associated risk. 

3. In accordance with the Information Asset Management Policy, UM maintains an 
inventory of information assets with sufficient detail to identify systems at risk by a 
particular technical vulnerability. 



 

Vulnerability Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 22 

 

2  

 

4. UM develops, implements, tests, and maintains a Vulnerability Management Plan 
that facilitates the reduction of risk from published technical vulnerabilities. The 
Vulnerability Management Plan includes the following at a minimum: 

 Roles and responsibilities for technical vulnerability management 

 Processes and procedures for monitoring, assessing, ranking, and remediating 
vulnerabilities identified in systems. 

 Processes and procedures that provide a timely response to technical vulnerabilities 
that present a risk to any information asset, including a timeline based on the level of 
risk. 

5. UM evaluates the Vulnerability Management Plan on an annual basis. 

6. Risks identified in the Vulnerability Management Plan which are expected to persist for a 
period of greater than one (1) year are added to the Corrective Action Plan according to 
the Risk Management Policy. 

7. Systems are appropriately hardened (e.g., configured with only necessary and secure 
services, ports and protocols enabled) according to the Configuration Management 
Policy. A hardened configuration standard exists for all system components and is 
documented. 

8. Annual system scans are performed to detect vulnerabilities (e.g., unauthorized 
software). 

9. Technical tests of the external and internal network are performed annually. Exploitable 
vulnerabilities found during technical testing are corrected and testing is repeated to 
verify the corrections. 



 

Vulnerability Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 22 

 

3  

 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The CISO, or designee, has general responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (with committee approval) at 
any time without prior notice to users. 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy.. 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 

 HITRUST Reference: 10.m Control of Technical Vulnerabilities
 PCI Reference: PCI DSS v3 2.2, PCI DSS v3 6.1, PCI DSS v3 6.2, PCI DSS v3 6.4.5, 

PCI DSS v3 6.4.5.1, PCI DSS v3 6.4.5.2, PCI DSS v3 6.4.5.3, PCI DSS v3 6.4.5.4, PCI 

DSS v3 11.2, PCI DSS v3 11.2.1, PCI DSS v3 11.2.2, PCI DSS v3 11.2.3, PCI DSS v3 

11.3, PCI DSS v3 11.3.1, PCI DSS v3 11.3.2, PCI DSS v3 11.3.3., PCI DSS v3 11.3.4



 

Vulnerability Management  
HIPAA Policy:  Security 22 

 

 

 

Related Documents: 

 Change Management Policy
 Configuration Management Policy

 Glossary

 Information Asset Management Policy
 Nessus Network Vulnerability Scanner Procedures

 Risk Management Plan

 Risk Management Policy
 Vulnerability Management Plan

 
 

Approval 
 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 

 
 
 


