
 
 

Information Exchange 
HIPAA Policy: Security 11 

 

1  

 

 

Summary:  Requirements for protecting PHI when transferring information 

electronically 
 

Affected Individuals:  Employees in HIPAA covered entities 

 

Purpose of Policy 

The purpose of this policy is to protect the exchange of University of Mississippi (UM) enterprise data in 
transit through various communication applications and media including but not limited to email, texting, 
messaging, paging, file transfer, virtual private networks, application interfaces, and other 
communication channels. 

 

This policy also includes the requirement for establishing information exchange agreements with third 
parties and protecting physical media in transit. 

 
Definitions 

For a complete list of definitions, refer to the Glossary. 

 
Scope 

This policy applies only to covered entities as defined in the University of Mississippi (UM) HIPAA 
hybrid policy. 

This policy applies to all workforce members, including users and students, and all personnel affiliated 
with third parties who access UM information assets regardless of physical location. 

 

Policy 

A. Information Exchange Policy 

1. UM shall protect the exchange and sharing of UM enterprise data. 
2. Formal procedures and controls shall be in place to protect the exchange of UM 

enterprise data through the use of all forms of communication media. 
3. The Information Technology Acceptable Use Policy shall define the acceptable use of 

electronic communication applications and systems. 
4. The Endpoint Protection Policy shall define the use of anti-malware software to protect 

electronic communications against malicious code. 

5. The Wireless Network Security Policy shall define the network controls necessary to 



 
 

Information Exchange 
HIPAA Policy: Security 11 

 

2  

 

protect electronic communications accessed via the UM wireless network. 
6. The Encryption Policy shall define the use of encryption to protect the exchange of 

electronic communications containing confidential data. 
7. The Media Protection Policy shall define the retention and disposal guidelines for 

electronic communications containing confidential data. 
8. The Remote Access Policy shall define the terms and conditions of access to UM’s 

information assets and access to external information assets (over which the 
organization has no control) to protect electronic communications during remote access 
sessions. 

9. The Third Party Risk Management Policy shall define the terms and conditions of 
electronic communications with other organizations owning, operating, and/or 
maintaining external information systems. 

10. Workforce Members shall be educated according to the Security Awareness  and Training 
Policy regarding UM policies and safe and approved practices for information exchange. 

B. Information Exchange Agreements 

1. Information exchange agreements shall be established and implemented for the 
exchange of information and software between UM and third parties. 

2. Information exchange agreements shall not conflict with, nor shall they lower the 
standards and requirements stated, in any business associate agreement between 
UM and third parties. 

3. Information exchange agreements may either be incorporated into a business associate 
agreement between UM and third parties or they may be a separate agreement. 

4. Information exchange agreements shall specify the minimum set of controls for an 
information sharing arrangement, such as: responsibilities, procedures, technical 
standards, technical solutions, incident management, reporting and notification, access 
controls, auditing, logging and monitoring, and physical safeguards. 

5. Information exchange agreements shall specify all applicable UM policies when 



 
 

Information Exchange 
HIPAA Policy: Security 11 

 

3  

 

feasible. 
6. UM policies, procedures, and standards regarding protection of the exchange of UM 

enterprise data shall be referenced in information exchange agreements when 
feasible. 

C. Physical Media in Transit 

1. Physical media containing confidential data shall be protected against unauthorized 
access, misuse, corruption, or destruction during transportation beyond UM's physical 
boundaries. Said media shall be encrypted meeting FIPS 140-2 encryption standard. 
Passphrases and other decryption means shall be provided via a separate transport 
medium from the data. 

2. Controls and procedures shall be established to protect confidential data residing on 
physical media from unauthorized disclosure or modification while in transit. 

D. Electronic Messaging, Texting, and Paging 

1. Information involved in electronic messaging, texting, and textual paging shall be 
appropriately protected in accordance with UM information security policies, and 
federal and state laws and regulations. 

2. Approval shall be obtained from the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) prior to 
using external public services (e.g., instant messaging, file sharing, etc.) that are not 
approved by or managed by UM. 

3. Electronic messages shall be encrypted throughout the duration of their end-to-end 
transport path according to the Encryption Policy. 

4. Users shall never send unencrypted confidential data via end-user messaging 
technologies (e.g., email, instant messaging, textual paging, SMS texting, chat, etc.). 

E. Interconnected Information Systems 

1. Procedures shall be developed and implemented to protect confidential data associated 
with the interconnection of information systems. 



 
 

Information Exchange 
HIPAA Policy: Security 11 

 

4  

 

2. Security and business implications shall be addressed for interconnecting information 
assets. 

Policy Compliance 

Enforcement 

The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) has general responsibility for the implementation and 
enforcement of this policy. 

 

Future Revisions 

UM reserves the right to add, delete, or revise any provision of this Policy (approved by committee) at 
any time, or any other Information Security Policy without prior notice to users. 

 

Sanctions 

Any user violating these policies or applicable local, state, or federal laws while using UM’s computing 
environment is subject to loss of network privileges and any other disciplinary actions deemed 
appropriate, up to and including termination and criminal and/or civil prosecution in accordance with 
policy. 

 

Exceptions 

Exceptions to this policy must follow the approved exception process as outlined in the Information 
Security Waiver Policy. All approved policy exceptions will be reviewed periodically for appropriateness by 
the CISO and may be revoked at any time with or without notice. 

 
Regulatory and Standards References 

The following regulations and standards are applicable to this policy: 



 
 

Information Exchange 
HIPAA Policy: Security 11 

 

 

 

 HIPAA Regulatory References: HIPAA § 164.308(b)(1), HIPAA § 164.308(b)(3), HIPAA § 
164.310(b), HIPAA § 164.310(d)(1), HIPAA § 164.310(d)(2)(iii), HIPAA § 164.312(c)(1), 
HIPAA § 164.312(c)(2), HIPAA § 164.312(e)(1), HIPAA § 164.312(e)(2)(i), HIPAA § 
164.312(e)(2)(ii) 

 

 HITRUST References: 09.s Information Exchange Policies and Procedures, 09.t 
Exchange Agreements, 09.u Physical Media in Transit, 09.v Electronic Messaging, 09.w 
Interconnected Business Information Systems 

 PCI References: PCI DSS v3 4.1, PCI DSS v3 4.1.1, PCI DSS v3 4.2, PCI DSS v3 9.6.2 

 
Related Documents: 

 Information Technology Acceptable Use Policy 

 Encryption Policy 

 Glossary 

 Media Protection Policy 

 Remote Access Policy 

 Privacy and Security Awareness and Training Policy 

 Third Party Risk Management Policy 

 Virus and Malware Protection Policy 
 Wireless Network Security Policy 

 
Approval 

 

 

 

 
Chief Information Security Officer  <date> 

 
 


