
Restrictions on Uses and Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy: Privacy 15 

 

1 
 

  
Summary:  Describes to what extent individuals may request that disclosures 
of their PHI be limited 
 
Affected Individuals:  Individuals working in covered entities; faculty; staff; 
students 
 
1.0 PURPOSE 
 
The intent of this policy is to ensure that patients are given the right to request that the 
University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC) restrict its uses and disclosures of a 
patient’s protected health information (PHI) for certain purposes. 

 
2.0 SCOPE 
 
The UMMC Request for Restrictions on Uses and Disclosures of PHI Policy applies to 
patient’s requesting to restrict their PHI and UMMC employees accepting the requests. 

 
3.0 STANDARDS 
 
UMMC permits patients to request that restrictions be placed on his/her PHI that is used 
and disclosed by UMMC for the following purposes: 
 

 To carry out treatment, payment and health care operations; 

 To inform a person(s) directly involved in caring for the patient or directly 
responsible for payment related to the patient’s healthcare services, of the 
patient’s status; and 

 To notify a person(s) responsible for the care of the patient, of the patient’s 
location, general condition, or death.   

 
UMMC is further required to agree to a request for restrictions when a patient makes the 
following request: 
 

 A request from a patient, who paid for items and services in full, out of pocket, to 
restrict disclosures of PHI to health plans for payment purposes and disclosures 
to the health plan for purposes of health care operations.      

The UMMC Office of Integrity and Compliance is responsible for receiving all such 
requests.  With the exception of the aforementioned request which must be honored by 
UMMC, the Office of Integrity and Compliance and/or the treating provider will be 
responsible for making a decision to either accept or deny all other requests.  
 
The UMMC Office of Integrity and Compliance will be responsible for reviewing the 
requests for restrictions on the use and disclosure of PHI for purposes of: 

 Payment; and 



Restrictions on Uses and Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy: Privacy 15 

 

2 
 

 Healthcare operations. 
 
The patient’s treating provider will be responsible for reviewing requests for restrictions 
on the uses and disclosures of PHI for the purposes of: 

 Treatment; 
 Notification of person(s) responsible for the patient, of the patient’s 

location, general condition or death; and  
 Informing a person(s) directly involved in caring for the patient or 

directly responsible for payment related to the patient’s healthcare 
services, of the patient’s status.   
 

Once a restriction is agreed to, UMMC and/or the treating provider is not required to 
notify the subsequent downstream provider.  It is the patient’s responsible to request the 
continuation of the restriction with the subsequent provider. 

 
3.1 Denied Requests: 
 
Instances where requests for restrictions will automatically be denied:  

 Emergency Situations – During emergency situations, UMMC will use and/or 
disclose a patient’s PHI that it has previously agreed to restrict.  This includes 
releasing information to providers outside of UMMC who are treating the patient 
in an emergency situation.  UMMC personnel must ask that the outside provider 
receiving such information to not further use or disclose the information. 

 Hospital’s Directory – The restrictions do not apply to the use of PHI in the 
hospital’s facility directory, if the patient has already agreed to be included in the 
directory. 

 Disclosures to the patient – UMMC will not restrict PHI disclosed by UMMC to the 
patient. 

 A restriction cannot be applied to the use or disclosure of PHI for any of the 
following uses and disclosures, which are permitted or required under HIPAA: 

 Uses and disclosures that are required by law; 
 Uses and disclosures for public health activities; 
 Disclosures about victims of abuse, neglect, or domestic violence; 
 Uses and disclosures for health oversight activities; 
 Disclosures for judicial and administrative proceedings; 
 Disclosures for law enforcement purposes; 
 Uses and disclosures about decedents; 
 Uses and disclosures for cadaveric organ, eye or tissue donation 

purposes; 
 Uses and disclosures for research purposes; 
 Uses and disclosures to avert a serious threat to health or safety; 
 Uses and disclosures for specialized government functions; and 
 Disclosures for workers’ compensation. 

 
3.2 Handling Requests: 



Restrictions on Uses and Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy: Privacy 15 

 

3 
 

 
The following are procedures to be used in handling requests from patients for 
restrictions on the use and disclosure of their PHI.  
 
The request must be in writing and must contain the following information: 

 Name of the patient; 

 Medical record number; 

 A specific description of the information they wish UMMC to restrict; 

 Dates of service to which the specific information pertains; 

 For what type of uses and disclosures the restriction will apply, such as 
restrictions for payment purposes, treatment, etc.;  

 For what reason they wish to restrict the information; 

 An expiration date, if applicable;   

 Signature of the patient making the request; and  

 The date the request is being made.   
 
These requests will be forwarded to the Office of Integrity and Compliance.  The Office 
of Integrity and Compliance will then review the request.  Based on the type of 
restriction being requested, either the Office of Integrity and Compliance or the treating 
provider will make a decision to agree or deny the request. UMMC will notify the patient 
in writing of the decision.  

 

 The Office of Integrity and Compliance will place notation in the record and 
will notify other departments affected by the restrictions to which UMMC has 
agreed, such as Revenue Cycle when the request affects payment to the 
University Hospitals and Clinics (UHC).   

 
3.3 Terminating Restrictions: 
 
UMMC has the right to terminate any restriction to which it has agreed under the 
following circumstances: 
 

 The patient agrees to or requests the termination in writing; 
 The patient orally agrees to the termination and the oral agreement is 

documented; or 
 UMMC informs the patient in writing that UMMC is terminating its 

agreement to a restriction.  UMMC will apply this termination only to PHI 
that is created or received after it has informed the patient of the 
termination. 

 
All requests to terminate any restrictions should be forwarded to the Office of Integrity 
and Compliance. 

 
 
4.0 CONTACT INFORMATION 



Restrictions on Uses and Disclosures of PHI 
HIPAA Policy: Privacy 15 

 

4 
 

 
For questions about the UMMC Request for Restrictions on Uses and Disclosures of 
PHI Policy or for more information, call the Office of Integrity and Compliance at 815-
3944. 

 
 
 


