
 

TITLE IX POLICY 

ACA.EO.100.012 

 

Policy Statement  

 
The University of Mississippi adheres to the guidelines set forth by Title IX of the Education 

Amendments of 1972. Title IX prohibits discrimination based on sex in educational programs and 

activities. Conduct prohibited by Title IX also includes sexual assault, sexual harassment and other 

forms of nonconsensual sexual conduct. Title IX protects students, faculty, and staff alike, and 

applies to both men and women. This policy is in compliance with applicable legal requirements 

including Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972; relevant provisions of the Violence 

Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013; Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; the Jeanne 

Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act; and other 

applicable federal and state laws. 

 

It is the position of the University that Title IX violations in any form will not be excused or 

tolerated. Criminal, civil, and university disciplinary processes are available to students, faculty, 

and staff with a Title IX complaint. The University is committed to prompt, effective and fair 

procedures to investigate and adjudicate Title IX complaints and to the education of the University 

community about the importance of responding to all forms of prohibited conduct. Special 

emphasis is placed on the rights, needs, and privacy of the complainant, as well as those of the 

respondent. At the same time, the University adheres to all federal, state, and local requirements 

for intervention and crime reporting related to Title IX violations. 

 

Purpose of Policy  

 
The University of Mississippi is committed to fostering an environment that prevents 

discrimination, sexual harassment, and other unwelcome sexual contact of employees, students, 

applicants for admission or employment, visitors to campus, or third parties who are participants in 

University of Mississippi programs or activities. Students, faculty, and staff should be able to live, 

study, and work in an environment free from sexual misconduct. The purpose of this policy is to 

promote a community of learning dedicated to nurturing excellence and intellectual inquiry and 

provide students, faculty, and staff notice about their duty to respect the dignity of each person by 

refraining from prohibited behaviors. This policy outlines prohibited conduct, including sexual 

harassment and other types of sexual misconduct, as well as unlawful discrimination, disparate 

treatment, and relationship violence. 

 

Discrimination and Disparate Treatment 

 
The University of Mississippi does not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race, color, gender, 

sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, religion, citizenship, national 

origin, age, disability, veteran status, or genetic information. Further, both men and women are 

protected from sex discrimination and sex-based harassment. 



Page 2  

Prohibited sex-based discrimination and harassment includes, without limitation, discrimination or 

harassment based on gender, gender identity, gender expression, pregnancy or childbirth. 

Educational decisions that cannot be based on sex include, without limitation, decisions relating to: 

admission, financial aid, academic advising and instruction, class assignments, evaluation and 

grading, discipline, housing, athletics, health and counseling services, 

recreational/residential/extracurricular services or programs, and participation and status in any 

University program or activity, whether on or off campus. 

Employees, students, applicants for admission or employment, or other participants in University 

of Mississippi programs or activities who believe they have been discriminated against are entitled 

to seek relief through the EORC Office or Title IX Coordinator. 

Sexual Harassment 
 

Pursuant to Title IX, The University of Mississippi prohibits sexual harassment, sexual assault, and 

other forms of unwelcome sexual contact in order to protect students, faculty, and staff. 

Sexual harassment includes unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other 

verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: (1) Submission to or rejection of such conduct 

is either an explicit or implicit term or condition of, or is used as the basis for decisions affecting 

an individual’s employment or advancement in employment, evaluation of academic work or 

advancement in an academic program, or basis for participation in any aspect of a University 

program or activity (quid pro quo); and/or (2) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of 

unreasonably interfering with an individual’s access to the University or an individual’s work 

environment or are so objectively offensive, pervasive, or severe that they effectively deny the 

victim access to the University of Mississippi’s resources and opportunities (hostile 

environment). 

A wide range of behaviors may qualify as sexual harassment, up to and including sexual assault. 

Some types of actions that may rise to the above level and constitute sexual harassment include:  

• treating others differently based on their gender, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or 

gender expression  

• verbal harassment or abuse of a sexual nature  

• subtle pressure for sexual activity  

• sexist remarks about a person’s clothing, body, or sexual activities  

• unwanted touching, patting, or pinching  

• demanding sexual favors accompanied by implied or overt threats concerning one’s job or 

working conditions  

• inappropriate display of sexually suggestive or pornographic materials  

• sexual assault or other types of sexual violence 



Page 3  

 
Other Sexual Misconduct

 
 

In addition to sexual harassment, The University of Mississippi also prohibits other forms of sexual 

misconduct, or any sexual behavior that was committed without effective consent. Sexual 

misconduct may vary in its severity and consists of a range of behaviors. These behaviors are 

serious violations and represent a threat to the safety of the University community. The 

requirements of this policy apply regardless of the sexual orientation and/or sexual identity of 

individuals engaging in sexual activity. The following descriptions represent sexual behaviors that 

violate The University of Mississippi’s community standards and values of respect, civility, and 

personal integrity. 

 

1. Sexual Penetration: Sexual intercourse, or sexual penetration, however slight, with any 

object or body part without effective consent.    

  

2. Sexual Touching: Any intentional touching of intimate body parts without effective 

consent. Sexual touching includes bodily contact or contact made with an object. 

 

3. Sexual Exploitation: Sexual exploitation occurs when any student or employee takes non-

consensual, unfair, or abusive advantage of another sexually for his or her own advantage or 

benefit, even though that behavior does not constitute one of the other sexual misconduct 

offenses. Examples include, but are not limited to:  

• Non-consensual videotaping, audiotaping, or photographing of sexual activity even 
if the sexual act is consensual.  

• Non-consensual posting, publishing, sharing, or displaying photo, audio, or video of 

sexual activity even if the activity was originally recorded with effective consent.   

• Voyeurism is a form of sexual exploitation in which one individual engages in 

secretive observation or non-consensual video or audio taping of another for personal 

sexual pleasure.   

• Any disrobing of another or exposure to another without effective consent.  

  

4. Attempted Act/Accomplice to Sexual Misconduct: Attempts to commit sexual 

misconduct are also prohibited under this policy, as is aiding in the commission of sexual 

misconduct as an accomplice.  

 

5. Use of Drugs and/or Alcohol to Induce Incapacity: This policy also prohibits sexual 

activity or attempted sexual activity with someone whose incapacity results from the taking of 

a drug or alcohol. Possession, use, and/or distribution of any “date-rape” drug or licit or 

illicit substances are prohibited, and administering or attempting to administer any of these 

drugs or substances, including alcohol, to someone else for the purpose of inducing incapacity 

is a violation of this policy. An individual may be charged with a violation of this policy even 

if no sexual activity took place.  

 



Page 4  

Other Title IX violations include stalking, relationship violence and retaliation, which are defined 

below. 

______________________________________________________________________________ 

Stalking, Including Cyber-Stalking 
______________________________________________________________________________ 

 
 In honor of academic freedom, civility, and the respect for the dignity of each person, students will 

refrain from a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to 

fear for his or her safety, the safety of others, or suffer substantial emotional distress. This policy will 

not be construed to impair any constitutionally protected activity, including speech, protest, or 

assembly. When such conduct includes expression or speech, the conduct must be more than merely 

offensive; it must be so objectively offensive, pervasive, and/or severe that if repeated it would 

effectively deny the victim access to the University’s resources and opportunities, unreasonably 

interfere with the victim’s work or living environment, or deprive the victim of some other protected 

right. Students who act inconsistently with this value and policy will be subject to conduct charges and 

proceedings. 

 

Relationship Violence  

 
 

The University prohibits any physical, sexual, or psychologically abusive behaviors used by an 

individual against a partner or former partner in an intimate relationship. The use of alcohol or 

drugs, by either party, in conjunction with an incident of relationship violence, does not alleviate 

responsibility or diminish the serious nature of the offense.  

  

Forms of relationship violence may include, but are not limited to:  

• Actions that are intended to cause bodily injury.  

• Threats or actions that cause reasonable fear of harm on the part of the victim, or threaten 

children or pets.  

• Assault with or without a weapon.    

• Psychological abuse.    

 

Retaliation  

 
Retaliation against an individual who initiates a Title IX complaint, participates in an investigation, 

or pursues legal action, is prohibited. The University defines retaliation as any adverse action 

(including intimidation) taken against an individual who has participated in any manner in an 

investigation, proceeding, or hearing under these policies and procedures. Retaliation may occur in 

person or electronically. 

  

Independent action may be taken against anyone engaging in retaliation including individuals who 

are acting on behalf of the respondent or complainant, with or without the knowledge of the 

complainant or respondent. 

 



Page 5  

In an effort to avoid retaliation, prevent recurrence of any discrimination or discriminatory effects, 

and provide for the safety of the all parties, the University will implement all necessary remedies 

during an investigation period and/or at the conclusion of an investigation. These remedies may 

include, but are not limited to: academic accommodations, “no contact” letters, changes in course 

schedules, and changes in housing assignments. 

 
Consent 

 
Sexual intimacy requires that all participants consent to the activity. Effective consent is the basis 

of this policy because effective consent maintains the value that all persons have the right to feel 

respected, acknowledged, and safe during sexual activity. Consent between two or more people is 
defined as an affirmative agreement – through clear actions or words – to engage in sexual activity. 

The person giving the consent must act freely, voluntarily, and with an understanding of his or her 
actions when giving the consent.  

  

Lack of protest or resistance does not constitute consent, nor does silence mean consent has been 

given. Relying solely on non-verbal communication can lead to misunderstanding. Persons who 

want to engage in sexual activity are responsible for obtaining consent – it should never be 

assumed.    

 

A prior relationship or prior sexual activity is not sufficient to demonstrate consent.  

  

Consent must be present throughout the sexual activity – at any time, a participant can 

communicate that he or she no longer consents to continuing the activity. If there is confusion as to 

whether anyone has consented or continues to consent to sexual activity, it is essential that the 

participants stop the activity until the confusion can be clearly resolved. 

 

Effective consent cannot result from force, or threat of force, coercion, fraud or intimidation.  In 

addition, an incapacitated person is not able to give consent. The use of force to obtain sexual 

access or to induce consent violates this policy whether the force is physical in nature, violent, or 

involves threats, intimidation or coercion.  

 

• Physical force includes but is not limited to: hitting, kicking, and restraining. Physical force 

means someone is physically exerting control of another person through violence.  

  

• Threatening someone to obtain consent for a sexual act is a violation of this policy.  Threats 
exist where a reasonable person would have been compelled by the words or actions of 

another to give permission to sexual activity to which he or she otherwise would not have 

consented.  

  

• Intimidation is an implied threat. Intimidation exists when a reasonable person would feel 
threatened or coerced even though there may not be any threat made explicitly or physical 

force. Intimidation is evaluated based on the intensity, frequency, or duration of the 

comments or actions.  

  



Page 6  

• Incapacitation: It is a violation of this policy if the initiator has sex with someone the initiator 
knows, or reasonably should know, to be incapacitated by alcohol, drugs, sleep or illness. A 

person who is unconscious, unaware, or otherwise physically helpless cannot give effective 

consent to sexual activity. Someone is incapacitated when he or she cannot understand who, 

what, when, where, why, or how, with respect to the sexual interaction.  

 

• Age of Consent: According to Mississippi Code §97-3-65, effective consent can never be 
given by persons under the age of 14. Students who are at least 17 years old cannot receive 

effective consent from anyone between the ages of 14 and 16, if they are younger by more 

than 36 months. Further, under Mississippi Code §97-3-95, a student under the age of 18 

cannot give effective consent to anyone in a position of trust or authority over the student, 

including, without limitation: the child's teacher, counselor, physician, psychiatrist, 

psychologist, minister, priest, physical therapist, chiropractor, legal guardian, parent, 

stepparent, aunt, uncle, scout leader or coach. 

 

 

Consensual Relationships  
 

UM’s policy concerning consensual relationships may be found at ACA.EO.100.011. 

 

Privacy  

 
The University of Mississippi has great respect for the privacy of the parties in a complaint. Under 

federal law, however, responsible employees who receive a report of sexual misconduct must share 

that information with the Title IX Coordinator unless otherwise exempt by state or federal law or 

University policy. Those individuals may need to act to maintain campus safety and must 

determine whether to investigate further under Title IX, regardless of the complainant’s request for 

confidentiality. 

 

After a report is received, the complainant will decide whether to pursue an investigation through 

the Title IX office. If a complainant requests confidentiality or asks that the complaint not be 

pursued, the Title IX Coordinator will take all reasonable steps to investigate and respond to the 

complaint consistent with the complainant’s request; however, the Title IX Coordinator may 

determine that the circumstances of the incident are so severe or that the circumstances otherwise 

indicate there is an ongoing danger to the complainant and/or members of the University 

community such that action must be taken on the part of the University beyond the action 

requested by the complainant. When determining whether to proceed without cooperation from the 

complainant, the Title IX Coordinator will weigh a number of factors. Examples of factors the 

Title IX Coordinator will consider are the following: the risk of the respondent committing 

additional acts; if the respondent has threatened to commit additional acts; if other complaints have 

been reported about the same respondent; if the complaint involves multiple respondents; the 

respondent’s history of arrests or other conduct records; the involvement of a weapon; the ages of 

the complainant and respondent; whether the respondent is in a position of authority over the 



Page 7  

complainant, and the university’s ability to move forward with the investigation without the 

complainant.   

 

If the Title IX Coordinator moves forward with the investigation, with or without the 

complainant’s participation, information will only be shared with those individuals who are 

responsible for handling the school’s response to the complaint and those necessary to the 

investigation. The Title IX Coordinator will inform the complainant, to the extent possible, of 

individuals with whom information about the complaint will be shared.   

  

Public awareness events such as “Take Back the Night,” the Clothesline Project, candlelight  

vigils, protests, “survivor speak outs” or other forums in which students disclose incidents of  

sexual violence, are not considered notice to the University of sexual violence for purposes of  

triggering its obligation to investigate any particular incident(s). Such events may, however, 

inform the need for campus-wide education and prevention efforts, and the University will provide 

information about students’ Title IX rights at these events. 

 

Violence Prevention  

 
The University is committed to an environment where all members utilize bystander intervention 

to prevent and end violence on campus and in the community. The University presents 

programming on prevention of sexual misconduct, relationship violence, and stalking to all 

students, staff and faculty at orientation and throughout the year. The University also educates all 

its members on awareness and intervention related to sexual misconduct, relationship violence and 

stalking. Education includes University policy, state criminal laws, Title IX and federal laws, the 

impact of trauma, how to recognize and respond to incidents and the importance of reporting 

incidents. The University mandates training for all incoming students to increase awareness and 

foster prevention. The University also mandates training for all staff and faculty. 

 

Individuals who work or volunteer in the on campus Violence Prevention Office, including front 

desk staff and students, can generally talk to a complainant without revealing any personally 

identifying information about an incident to the University. A complainant can seek assistance and 

support from these individuals without triggering a University investigation that could reveal the 

complainant’s identity or that the complainant has disclosed the incident.   

 

For a listing of available resources, please visit the website http://umsafe.olemiss.edu. To request 

an educational program, contact the Violence Prevention Office at 915-1059. 

 

Reporting 
 

Community members who believe that they have experienced a potential Title IX violation from a 

student may submit a complaint against the respondent in writing or in person to the Title IX  

Coordinator, 270 D Martindale Hall (915-7045).  Any University faculty or staff member, except 

those who work or volunteer in the on campus Violence Prevention Office and those with statutory 

privilege, including but not limited to those providing counseling or health care services through 

the University Counseling Center, Student Health Services, and/or Psychological Services Center, 

http://umsafe.olemiss.edu/


Page 8  

who is notified by a student of a Title IX incident by another student is to report the incident 

immediately (but not later than three calendar days) to the Title IX Coordinator.  

 

While maintaining a complainant’s confidentiality, the Violence Prevention Office must report 

the nature, date, time, and general location of an incident to the Title IX Coordinator. This 

limited report – which includes no information that would directly or  indirectly identify the 

complainant – helps keep the Title IX Coordinator informed of the general extent and nature of 

sexual violence on and off campus so the coordinator can track patterns, evaluate the scope of 

the problem, and formulate appropriate campus-wide responses. Before reporting any 

information to the Title IX Coordinator, these individuals will consult with the complainant to 

ensure that no personally identifying details are shared with the Title IX Coordinator. 

 

Interim Steps  

 
The investigation into a Title IX complaint is only one part of the University’s prompt and 

effective response on behalf of the complainant. The Title IX Coordinator may recommend 

immediate implementation of additional steps to provide for the safety of the complainant or 

others, to avoid possible retaliation, or to prevent further occurrence of any discrimination or 

discriminatory effects. These steps may include, but are not limited to academic accommodations; 

“no contact” letters; changes in course schedules and changes in housing assignments; and 

disability, health, and/or mental health services. Any such interim step taken by the Title IX 

Coordinator is not appealable, but such steps may be modified by the Title IX Coordinator at any 

time. 

 
Student Procedures  

 
The University of Mississippi strives to create a respectful, safe, and non-threatening environment 

for its students. The policy which establishes procedures for responding to sexual misconduct 

incidents where the complainant and/or respondent is a student may be found at DCA.SC.200.075. 

 

Faculty/Staff Procedures  

 
Title IX complaints in which the complainant and/or respondent is a faculty or staff member are 

governed by the University’s Sexual Harassment policy and procedures and may be found at 

ACA.EO.100.010.

 

Contact Information  

 
The University’s Title IX Coordinator oversees policies and procedures that apply to complaints 

alleging sex discrimination (including sexual harassment, sexual assault, and sexual violence) by 

employees, students or third parties. Responsibilities performed in this policy by “the Title IX 

Coordinator” may be performed by the Title IX Coordinator, or by another University employee 

trained by, and acting under the supervision of, the Title IX Coordinator. Contact information for 

The University of Mississippi’s Title IX Coordinator is listed below. 

 



Page 9  

Honey Ussery  

Title IX Coordinator Post Office Box 1848  

270 D Martindale Student Services Center  

662.915.7045 

Fax:662.915.1229  

titleix@olemiss.edu or hbussery@olemiss.edu 

 
  


