
Policy for Graduate Minors 

 

Minors are a coherent set of courses defined by one or more units outside the student's 

enrolling program. A minor encourages and recognizes expertise gained in a particular 

area. This expertise could be completely outside the usual degree requirements or it could 

significantly extend knowledge in an area closely related to, but still outside, a particular 

degree program.  

 

Admissions Requirements 

 

A student may pursue a graduate minor while admitted in full-standing to a master’s, 

specialist or doctoral degree program.  The student must apply to the coordinator of the 

graduate minor program before completion of one-half of the courses that will potentially 

count towards the minor completion.  The coordinator or coordinating committee for the 

minor will establish and interpret the admission criteria. Admission to a minor must be 

with the knowledge and approval of the student’s advisor and the academic program in 

which the student is enrolled.  

 

Graduate Minor Requirements 

 

A graduate minor must require at least 12 hours of graduate level courses from among an 

approved list of courses pertinent to the minor topic.  No transfer credit may be counted 

toward a minor.  No more than three hours may come from practicum, internship, 

research or individual study courses.  A minimum GPA of 3.0 is required for courses 

counted towards the minor.  

 

Administration 

 

Student records relating to the minor are maintained by the coordinator of the minor.  The 

coordinator and/or coordinating committee will make decisions about admissions into the 

minor, will provide oversight regarding courses comprising the minor, and will notify the 

Graduate School when a student has completed the requirements for the minor.   

Credit used toward the completion of one minor may not be applied toward another 

minor but it is at the discretion of the major degree department to determine which, if 

any, of the courses used to fulfill the minor will also be used to fulfill the requirements of 

the graduate major degree. Some minors may require that a member of the unit(s) 

offering the minor serve on the student’s master’s or doctoral committee. 

 

 


