
Smoke-Free Campus Environment 

Summary/Purpose: To provide notice of and guidelines about the smoke-free environment at The 

University of Mississippi.* 

Smoking is prohibited at all times, and at all locations of The University of Mississippi Oxford campus, 

including University-owned facilities, properties, and grounds. This includes but is not limited to the 

following: 

 The interior of all University-owned buildings; 

 All outside property or grounds of the Oxford campus, including sidewalks, parking lots, 

recreational areas and partially enclosed areas such as walkways, breezeways, patios, porches, 

gazebos, tents, and bus shelters; 

 Within any University of Mississippi-owned vehicles, including buses, vans, shuttles, golf carts 

and all other University vehicles; and 

 All indoor and outdoor athletics venues and facilities 

 

This policy applies to all faculty, staff, students, visitors, and contractors. 

For purposes of this policy, “smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying, or possessing any 

lighted tobacco product, including cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, and any other lit tobacco products, 

including electronic cigarettes. 

The University also prohibits littering the campus with remains of any tobacco products. Additionally, the 

University-controlled advertising, sale, or free sampling of tobacco products is prohibited on campus, 

regardless of the vendor. 

Organizers and attendees at public events, such as conferences, meetings, public lectures, social events, 

cultural events, and athletic events using University-owned facilities, grounds, and properties are required 

to abide by University of Mississippi policy. Therefore, organizers of such events are responsible for 

communicating to attendees the policies of the University and for enforcing this policy. 

Respect and Responsibility: The success of this policy depends on the thoughtfulness, consideration, and 

cooperation of smokers and non-smokers. All members of the University community share in the 

responsibility for adhering to and enforcing this policy. Any complaints should be brought to the attention 

of the University Police Department and anyone who complains shall be protected against retaliation. 

Enforcement: The responsibility for the enforcement and communication of this policy rests with all 

members of the University community and the University Police Department. 

Visitors, contractors, and other individuals on campus who are in violation of the policy should be 

reminded of the policy and asked to comply with our smoke-free campus policy. 

All faculty, staff, and students who are in violation of this policy should be reminded of the policy and 

asked to comply. Students who violate this policy will be referred to student conduct and subject to 

sanctions, including fines. Employees who violate this policy could face employment related discipline 

and/or fines. Visitors and others who violate this policy may be required to leave a facility, event, or 

campus, and repeated violations could result in the person being issued a trespassing ban from the 

university. For complete information about policy enforcement, go to www.olemiss.edu/smokefree. 



Smoking Cessation Programs: The Student and Employee Pharmacy/ Health Services offers a range of 

smoking cessation and support programs for any member of the University community who desires to 

quit smoking. The University’s employee health insurance plan covers the full cost for three months of 

cessation medications. To learn more about smoking cessation programs available to students and 

employees, please go to www.olemiss.edu/smokefree. 


