
 The University of Mississippi 

 Page 1 of 7 

NAMING GUIDELINES 

 

Summary/Purpose:  Guidelines established by the University of Mississippi Naming 

Committee ensure that gifts with associated naming rights are managed in a consistent manner.  

These guidelines are designed to provide donors with equitable, consistent, and appropriate 

recognition and stewardship for their generous support, leading to lasting relationships with the 

university.  In recognition and appreciation of their generosity, donors who make certain types of 

charitable contributions to the university are offered the opportunity to select the names of 

programs, facilities, positions, or entities being funded by their gifts. 

 

Outlined below are the types of gifts that may carry naming rights and information related to the 

minimum-monetary amount required for specific naming gifts, name approval process and 

duration, donor recognition, and other terms. 

 

I. APPLICABILITY 

This Policy applies to gifts with associated naming opportunities at the University of 

Mississippi as a form of recognition for the contributions of individuals or organizations to 

the university. 

 

II. TYPES OF FUNDS WITH POTENTIAL NAMING OPPORTUNITIES  

a. Endowed: Endowed funds are designed to provide perpetual support to a designated area.   

To establish a named endowed fund, a gift must meet the funding minimum set by the 

university or University of Mississippi Foundation (UMF).  For current university named 

endowed fund minimums, contact University Development. 

b. Non-endowed: In certain circumstances, current-use commitments can qualify for a 

naming opportunity.  Many gifts to name physical entities are in this category.  Generally, 

non-endowed named academic or staff positions will not be approved. 

 

III. STANDARD DESIGNATIONS FOR NAMING GIFTS 

a. Physical Entity: 

i. Buildings and other major facilities, discrete components of buildings (wings, lecture 

halls, auditoriums, foyers, classrooms, laboratories, studios, offices, conference 

rooms, etc.), athletic facilities, residence halls, and other structures 



 The University of Mississippi 

Page 2 of 7 
 

ii. Campus grounds, outdoor renovations, gardens, trees, fountains, benches, walkways, 

parking facilities, and other real property 

iii. Libraries, or parts of libraries, and other collections of significant size and continuing 

educational, scientific, historic, artistic, or cultural value 

b. Non-Physical Entity: 

i. Colleges, schools, departments, institutes, centers, programs, teaching awards, and 

prizes 

ii. Academic positions, including but not limited to deanships, professorships, chairs, 

directorships, and lectureships 

iii. Administrative positions, including but not limited to vice chancellors, vice presidents, 

and directors 

iv. Student support, including but not limited to scholarships, fellowships, and other 

student awards 

 

IV. GENERAL TERMS 

a. Naming of a university asset or entity must be made in accordance with this Policy and 

related procedures, and meet all terms of the university and UMF’s Gift Acceptance, 

Counting, and Reporting Policy. 

b. The donor may select the name of the entity being funded, so long as the criteria set forth 

in this Policy are met, university approval is granted, and in required cases Mississippi 

Institutions of Higher Learning (IHL) approval is granted.  Factors that may be considered 

by the university in determining the appropriateness of a name include: 

i. Consistency with the mission, vision, reputation, and values of the university 

ii. Whether a name may imply the university's endorsement of a political or ideological 

position or the use of a particular product or service 

iii. Potential conflict of interest (primarily in cases of corporate or organizational naming 

gifts) 

iv. Whether the name reinforces the university's branding standards 

v. Potential conflict with existing named entities or spaces 

c. Naming gifts do not confer the right to the donor to determine the use of the fund (e.g., 

the purpose or use of the named space, specific beneficiary of a student or faculty support 

fund, program curricula, and/or research outcomes). 



 The University of Mississippi 

Page 3 of 7 
 

d. A named entity may not be announced by any university unit or donor prior to final 

approval as required by this Policy. 

 

V. NAMING GIFT VALUES 

a. Endowed Funds: 

i. The university and UMF establish the minimum gift amount required to create each 

type of named endowed fund.  Such minimums are important to ensure the endowed 

fund provides sufficient funds to accomplish the purpose intended by the donor.  

Current minimums are listed below: 

1. Chair    $2 million and above 

2. Professorship   $1 million and above 

3. Director, Lecturer, or 

Scholar   $500,000 and above 

4. Lecture Series   $50,000 and above 

5. Excellence in Teaching $25,000 and above 

 

ii. Minimum monetary gift amounts for named endowed funds will be amended by the 

UM Naming Committee from time to time to correspond with real costs. 

iii. In some cases, the name of an endowed fund may be different from the name used 

publicly for the entity the fund supports.  In such instances, both the name of the fund 

and the name to be used publicly will be detailed in the associated gift agreement. 

iv. For current university named endowed fund minimums, contact University 

Development. 

b. Current-use Funds: 

i. In general, named current-use funds adhere to the UM Naming Committee guidelines 

required to create named endowed funds.  Exceptions to this standard are rare and are 

only granted by the UM Naming Committee and Chancellor as needed. 

ii. In some cases, the name of a current-use fund may be different from the name used 

publicly for the entity the fund supports.  In such instances, both the name of the fund 

and the name to be used publicly will be detailed in the associated gift agreement. 

c. Physical Entities: 



 The University of Mississippi 

Page 4 of 7 
 

i. Once a new building, expansion, or renovation has been approved by the university, 

the UM Naming Committee will recommend the value of associated naming gifts to 

the Chancellor.  This applies to spaces both within and outside buildings. 

ii. Similarly, the value of associated naming gifts for existing university spaces will be 

determined by the UM Naming Committee in consultation with the Chancellor. 

iii. As a general guideline, 25 percent of the cost of a new building is the targeted naming 

gift.  The UM Naming Committee will determine the value of major expansions and 

renovations of existing buildings and the targeted levels for naming gifts and make a 

recommendation to the Chancellor.  The committee will also consider factors such as 

the role an individual or organization plays in raising significant funds for the 

university. 

   

VI. NAMING APPROVAL AND TIMING OF NAMING ACTIVATION  

a. The Vice Chancellor for Development manages the naming approval process for gift-

related namings in consultation with the UM Naming Committee.  The additional 

members of the UM Naming Committee are the Provost or designee, Vice Chancellor for 

Administration and Finance or designee, Vice Chancellor for Intercollegiate Athletics or 

designee, Chief Marketing and Communications Officer or designee, and President of 

UM Foundation or designee.  Other members may be added as circumstances dictate. 

b. Name approval may not be granted until the proposed name is known.  If the donor does 

not wish to select the name to be applied when the gift is made, the university may accept 

the gift, with the name determined later, subject to the terms of approval outlined in this 

Policy. 

c. The UM Naming Committee will make recommendations to the Chancellor for his or her 

approval. 

d. Any naming of an organization requires IHL approval and will be requested by the 

Chancellor. 

e. For binding, irrevocable gifts, a name may go into effect before the gift is paid in full at 

the discretion of the UM Naming Committee in consultation with necessary university 

parties. 

f. For non-binding, revocable gifts, a name will not be activated until the gift is received. 

 



 The University of Mississippi 

Page 5 of 7 
 

VII. DONOR RECONGITION  

a. The university places great value on recognizing and showing appreciation to donors for 

their generosity.  Therefore, in addition to providing naming rights for eligible gifts, other 

methods of recognition may be applied, such as those outlined below.  It is highly 

important that recognition be equitable and consistent based on gift type, amount, and 

designation, and that it adhere to established university standards. 

b. Physical Recognition: 

i. Gifts to name a physical entity or college, school, department, center, or institute will 

typically be recognized via signage, plaques, displays, or other physical installations. 

ii. The nature and attributes of the physical recognition will be: commensurate to the 

level and type of gift, designed in accordance with university standards, and aligned 

with the features of the intended placement location. 

iii. Corporate or organization logos may not be incorporated into recognition signage 

without approval of the UM Naming Committee and the Chancellor. 

iv. Physical donor recognition items must be approved by the donor and appropriate 

university representatives prior to production and installation, and may not be installed 

until the terms outlined in this Policy have been met. 

c. Other Recognition: 

Naming gift donors may also be recognized via other means (e.g., events and media 

announcements), corresponding with the type, amount, and purpose of the gift. 

 

VIII. DURATION OF NAMING  

a. Naming is generally granted for the useful life of the entity unless otherwise specified in 

the gift agreement (and subject to the terms of revocation as set forth in this Policy). 

b. For current-use gifts, naming terms, including duration, shall be set forth in writing by the 

university and donor. 

c. If circumstances change so that the purpose for which the named entity was established is 

or needs to be significantly altered, is no longer needed/ceases to exist, or if a physical 

entity is replaced, significantly renovated, or no longer habitable, the university will 

consult with the donor if possible, or the donor's estate, if practicable, to determine an 

appropriate way to recognize the original naming gift. 
 



 The University of Mississippi 

Page 6 of 7 
 

IX. RENAMING OR REMOVAL OF A NAME 

a. The University reserves the right to remove any naming of a building, property, or major 

academic unit should the UM Naming Committee determine that any of the following 

conditions occurs: 

i. The continued use of a name compromises the public’s trust or image of 

the university or is inconsistent with the mission and values of the 

university. 

ii. The donor does not perform obligations specified in the gift agreement.  If 

partial funding was received that is sufficient for an alternative naming 

opportunity, the terms of this Policy shall govern any renegotiation for a 

suitable naming.  

b. A proposal to rename a facility or area, or to add a second name, shall adhere to the 

criteria outlined above.  In addition, these principles shall be followed: 

i. Any proposal to rename a facility or an area or to add a second name to 

recognize a gift will be taken under consideration by the UM Naming 

Committee.  Any proposal shall be reviewed by the General Counsel of 

the university.  The review shall include any gift documents pertaining to 

the original gift and related naming, as well as the gift documents 

pertaining to the subsequent gift and proposed renaming. 

ii. When a facility that has been named to recognize a gift or an individual 

has reached the end of its useful life and will be replaced or substantially 

renovated, the replaced or renovated structure may be renamed in 

recognition of another gift. 

iii. When an area named to recognize a gift or in honor of an individual will 

be developed for another use, the new facilities may be named in 

recognition of new gifts. 

iv. Appropriate recognition of earlier donors and honorees shall be included 

in or adjacent to new and renovated facilities, as well as in redeveloped 

areas. 

v. When a facility or area is proposed for renaming, campus or university 

representatives shall make all reasonable efforts to inform in advance the 

original donors or honorees and their immediate family members. 



 The University of Mississippi 

Page 7 of 7 
 

c. All requests for removing a name must follow the university processes and go 

through the Undergraduate Council and the Council of Academic Administrators 

before coming to the UM Naming Committee. 

d. Revocation decisions shall be made by the Chancellor based on the 

recommendation of the UM Naming Committee.  Any change of an 

organizational unit requires IHL approval.  The Chancellor will request IHL 

approval. 

 

X. SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES AND EXCEPTION 

Any special circumstances or requests for exceptions must be referred to the Vice 

Chancellor for Development, who will consult with the UM Naming Committee and make a 

recommendation to the Chancellor. 

 

XI. CURRENT NAMING OPPORTUNITIES  

Contact University Development at (662) 915-1586 or visit give.olemiss.edu.   

 


